File Name: SLB-SEP-2008-EN
Year: 2008
Country Name: Solomon Islands
Country Code: SLB
Category: SEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2008
Start Year: 2008
End Year: 2017
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: 143566-SB
IMPLEMENTATION COMPLETION AND RESULTS REPORT
IDA-H4150, IDA-H9130
ON 
GRANTS
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 3.9 MILLION
(US$6.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
AND
IDA-53790
ON
A CREDIT
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 7.2 MILLION
(US$11.0 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
TO THE
SOLOMON ISLANDS
FOR THE
SOLOMON ISLANDS SUSTAINABLE ENERGY ( P100311 ) PROJECT
November 11, 2019
Energy and Extractives Global Practice
East Asia And Pacific Region
This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of 
their official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 
(Exchange Rate Effective May 31, 2019)
Currency Unit = Solomon Islands Dollars (SBD)
SBD 8.21 = US$1
US$1.38 = SDR 1
FISCAL YEAR
July 1 – June 30
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AF Additional Financing
ADB Asian Development Bank
BP Business Procedure
CAPEX Capital Expenditure
CPF Country Partnership Framework
CSO Community Service Obligation
EIRR Economic Internal Rate of Return
ESMAP Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
FEA Fiji Electric Authority
FIRR Financial Internal Rate of Return
FM Financial Management
FNPV Financial Net Present Value
GDP Gross Domestic Product
HIES Household Income and Expenditure Survey 
ICB International Competitive Bidding
IFI International Financial Institution
ISR Implementation Status and Results Report
KPI Key Performance Indicator
MTDP Medium-Term Development Plan
MTR Midterm Review
MTS Medium-Term Strategy
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
NCB National Competitive Bidding
NDS National Development Strategy
NPV Net Present Value
O&M Operations and Maintenance
PAD Project Appraisal Document
PDO Project Development Objective
PV Photovoltaic
RAMSI Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon IslandsSAIDI System Average Interruption Duration Index
SAIFI System Average Interruption Frequency Index
SCD Systematic Country Diagnostic
SEFP Sustainable Energy Financing Project
SIEA Solomon Islands Electricity Authority
SIEAREEP Solomon Islands Electricity Access and Renewable Energy Expansion
SIG Solomon Islands Government
SISEP Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy Project
SIWA Solomon Islands Water Authority
SOE State-owned Enterprise
TRHDP Tina River Hydropower Development Project
TTL Task Team Leader
WACC Weighted Average Cost of Capital
Regional Vice President: Victoria Kwakwa
Country Director: Michel Kerf
Regional Practice Director: Ranjit Lamech
Practice Manager: Jie Tang
Task Team Leader(s): Maria Isabel A. S. Neto
ICR Main Contributor: Leena ChaukulkarTABLE OF CONTENTS
I. PROJECT CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES....................................................... 6
A. CONTEXT AT APPRAISAL .........................................................................................................6
B. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION (IF APPLICABLE) .....................................13
II. OUTCOME .................................................................................................................... 17
A. RELEVANCE OF PDOs............................................................................................................17
B. ACHIEVEMENT OF PDOs (EFFICACY) ......................................................................................19
C. EFFICIENCY ...........................................................................................................................25
D. JUSTIFICATION OF OVERALL OUTCOME RATING....................................................................28
E. OTHER OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS (IF ANY)............................................................................30
III. KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECTED IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOME................................ 33
A. KEY FACTORS DURING PREPARATION ...................................................................................33
B. KEY FACTORS DURING IMPLEMENTATION.............................................................................34
IV. BANK PERFORMANCE, COMPLIANCE ISSUES, AND RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME .. 35
A. QUALITY OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E) ............................................................35
B. ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE.....................................................38
C. BANK PERFORMANCE ...........................................................................................................40
D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME.......................................................................................41
V. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ............................................................................. 42
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS........................................................... 44
ANNEX 2. BANK LENDING AND IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT/SUPERVISION......................... 53
ANNEX 3. PROJECT COST BY COMPONENT ........................................................................... 55
ANNEX 4. EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS........................................................................................... 56
ANNEX 5. BORROWER, CO-FINANCIER AND OTHER PARTNER/STAKEHOLDER COMMENTS ... 69
ANNEX 6. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS (IF ANY)..................................................................... 94LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Outcome Indicators Mapped to Relevant Project Objectives.......................................................12
Table 2. Key Changes to SISEP during Implementation..............................................................................14
Table 3. Project Costs at Approval and after Approval of AF and Each Restructuring ...............................16
Table 4. Energy-related CPF Objectives in the Solomon Islands’ Current CPF Program.............................18
Table 5. Changes in Indicator Targets and Relevance for Split ratings.......................................................20
Table 6. Efficacy Ratings for Each Outcome of the PDO Based on Achievement Ratio..............................25
Table 7. Summary of Economic Benefits and Costs....................................................................................25
Table 8. Summary of Economic Benefits and Costs....................................................................................26
Table 9. Benchmarking of Pacific Island SOEs.............................................................................................29
Table 10. SISEP Final Outcome Ratings.......................................................................................................30
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. SISEP Theory of Change Diagram.................................................................................................10
Figure 2. Cost and Revenues Per kWh Generated......................................................................................23
Figure 3. Profitability Per kWh Generated (SBD)........................................................................................24
Figure 4. SISEP and MFD Approach Used in the TIna River Hydro Development Project ..........................32 lDATA SHEET
BASIC INFORMATION
Product Information
Project ID Project Name
P100311 Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy
Country Financing Instrument
Solomon Islands Investment Project Financing
Original EA Category Revised EA Category
Not Required (C) Partial Assessment (B)
Organizations
Borrower Implementing Agency
Ministry of Finance and Treasury Solomon Islands Electricity Authority
Project Development Objective (PDO)
Original PDO
The objective of the project is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of 
SIEA through: improved financial and operational management, reduction of losses, and increased revenue 
collection.
Revised PDO
The objective of the project is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of 
SIEA.FINANCING
Original Amount (US$) Revised Amount (US$) Actual Disbursed (US$)
World Bank Financing
IDA-H4150 4,000,000 3,999,894 3,834,859
IDA-53790 11,000,000 6,741,699 5,925,941
IDA-H9130 2,000,000 1,994,522 1,948,784
Total 17,000,000 12,736,115 11,709,584
Non-World Bank Financing
0 0 0
Borrower/Recipient 6,900,000 8,200,000 8,200,000
Total 6,900,000 8,200,000 8,200,000
Total Project Cost 23,900,000 20,936,114 19,909,584
KEY DATES
Approval Effectiveness MTR Review Original Closing Actual Closing
08-Jul-2008 25-Jun-2009 30-Dec-2012 31-Mar-2019RESTRUCTURING AND/OR ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Date(s) Amount Disbursed (US$M) Key Revisions
22-Mar-2012 2.06 Change in Results Framework
Change in Components and Cost
Change in Loan Closing Date(s)
Change in Financing Plan
Change in Implementation Schedule
13-Feb-2014 3.69 Additional Financing
Change in Project Development Objectives
Change in Results Framework
Change in Components and Cost
Change in Loan Closing Date(s)
Change in Financing Plan
01-May-2017 5.15 Change in Results Framework
Change in Components and Cost
Change in Loan Closing Date(s)
Change in Financing Plan
Change in Implementation Schedule
10-Apr-2018 7.30 Change in Results Framework
Change in Components and Cost
Cancellation of Financing
Reallocation between Disbursement Categories
KEY RATINGS
Outcome Bank Performance M&E Quality
Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory Modest
RATINGS OF PROJECT PERFORMANCE IN ISRs
No. Date ISR Archived DO Rating IP Rating
Actual 
Disbursements 
(US$M)
01 23-Jun-2009 Moderately 
Unsatisfactory Moderately Unsatisfactory 0
02 28-Nov-2009 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory .11
03 11-Dec-2010 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 1.09
04 01-Mar-2012 Moderately 
Unsatisfactory Moderately Unsatisfactory 1.9705 24-Nov-2012 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 2.47
06 01-Oct-2013 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 3.23
07 07-Jul-2014 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 3.83
08 20-Jan-2015 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 3.64
09 02-Oct-2015 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Unsatisfactory 3.81
10 02-Jun-2016 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Unsatisfactory 3.86
11 04-Dec-2016 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 4.62
12 17-May-2017 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 5.15
13 22-Nov-2017 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 6.54
14 16-May-2018 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 7.94
15 02-Nov-2018 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 9.34
16 02-Apr-2019 Moderately Satisfactory Moderately Satisfactory 11.37
SECTORS AND THEMES
Sectors
Major Sector/Sector (%)
Energy and Extractives 100
Other Energy and Extractives 100
Themes
Major Theme/ Theme (Level 2)/ Theme (Level 3) (%)
Public Sector Management 33
Public Administration 33
Transparency, Accountability and Good 
Governance 33
Urban and Rural Development 67
Urban Development 67
Services and Housing for the Poor 67ADM STAFF
Role At Approval At ICR
Regional Vice President: James W. Adams Victoria Kwakwa
Country Director: Nigel Charles Emil Roberts Michel Kerf
Director: Christian Delvoie Ranjit J. Lamech
Practice Manager: Junhui Wu Jie Tang
Task Team Leader(s): Antonie De Wilde Maria Isabel A. S. Neto
ICR Contributing Author: Leena ChaukulkarI. PROJECT CONTEXT AND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
A. CONTEXT AT APPRAISAL
Context
1. The Solomon Islands, at the time of appraisal in 2008, had emerged from a period of political
turmoil and civil unrest. Over the period from 1998 to 2002, real gross domestic product (GDP) had fallen
around 24 percent, exports had declined drastically, and external debt levels had soared. After ethnic
tension ended in 2003, the economy started a strong recovery and recorded growth rates ranging from 8
percent in 2004 to 10 percent in 2007. The recovery was attributed to the return of business investment
and an increase in export receipts and was supported by the arrival of a Regional Assistance Mission to
the Solomon Islands (RAMSI). Budget surpluses were consistently observed from 2003 to 2007 due to
higher government revenues and better expenditure management.
2. However, the economy of the Solomon Islands faced a number of challenges. Less than a quarter
of the population was involved in any paid work and the majority was involved in subsistence or cash crop
agriculture. Exports were commodity based and included timber, cocoa, and copra. Economic growth in
recent years was deemed to be unsustainable as it was based on post conflict recovery and unsustainable
growth of the logging sector. A reliable and cost-efficient power supply, a key ingredient for private sector
growth, needed to be built.
3. High costs and poor electricity system reliability were significant issues in the energy sector. The
high cost of power could be attributed to two main factors:
(a) High cost of petroleum which was due to rising international oil prices and the costly logistics
of supplying it to the Solomon Islands. Diesel-fueled power generation accounted for 98
percent of the total. Electricity tariffs which incorporated automatic fuel price adjustments
rose to a point where electricity became too costly for an average family using 250 W for 8
hours a day. This usage translated to a need to pay US$1 per day, which was unsustainable
in a country where total GDP per capita amounted to US$690 per year.
(b) Power network losses with ad hoc maintenance and unsystematic operational practices
added to unsustainably high costs. At appraisal, power network losses had reached 21
percent. During the period of ethnic tension, power generating capacity in Honiara declined
as generator maintenance programs were neglected. Overdue maintenance needs on the
distribution network were causing outages of approximately 72 hours per week.
4. Access to electricity was low. Less than 10 percent of the population had access to electricity.
The Solomon Islands Electricity Authority (SIEA), a government-owned statutory body responsible for
power supply and distribution, was unable to connect new customers and customers were unable to pay
the high costs of electricity. The number of disconnections was increasing. The rural population, existing
primarily on subsistence agriculture and fishing, relied on kerosene for home lighting and wood for
cooking.5. SIEA was in financial distress. Operating losses had increased from SBD 12 million in 2005 to
approximately SBD 45 million in 2007, equivalent to about 30 percent of total operating revenue. More
than 70 percent of the operating loss was interest due on past debt. A crucial factor in the remaining
operating losses was the rising price of oil. Only 95 percent of the oil price increases were allowed to be
recovered through electricity price increases. Further worsening SIEA’s financial health was a decline in
its bill collection efficiency which had declined to 72 percent in 2007. A significant factor was unpaid
electricity bills by other state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Total SOE arrears were SBD 27 million at the end
of 2007.
6. Two main issues in the energy sector that needed to be addressed were reducing electricity
costs and improving reliability and increasing access in rural areas and outer islands. If both issues
needed to be addressed satisfactorily, a prerequisite condition was a strengthened SIEA in terms of both
financial health and operational capacity.
(a) Reducing electricity costs and improving reliability. In the near term, relatively simple
measures to reduce costs such as reducing technical losses, improving maintenance and
repairs, and improving operational practices were feasible. However, over the medium term,
the development of a far lower-cost renewable power generation was considered critical to
mitigate the impact of rising oil prices. In this context, opportunities for the development of
hydropower generation were identified with a potential 22 MW run-of-the-river
hydropower project at Ngalimbiu related to the development of the Gold Ridge mine. After
meeting the demand of the Gold Ridge mine, the balance of power from the proposed
hydropower project would be sufficient to meet load in Honiara with a potentially dramatic
drop in overall electricity supply cost. International financial institutions (IFIs) such as the
European Investment Bank expressed an interest in participating in the project. However,
this meant that SIEA, which would play a critical role in this project, needed to be
strengthened. In particular, issues that needed to be strengthened were the development
of power purchase agreements, meeting compliance with safeguards such as compensation
for land users and landowners, and regulatory issues.
(b) Increasing access in rural areas and outer islands. At the time of appraisal in 2008, the
Global Environment Facility-supported Sustainable Energy Financing Project (SEFP) was
under implementation. The SEFP was designed to make the purchase of basic solar
photovoltaic (PV) energy affordable and accessible with low interest loans to purchase,
install, and maintain solar PV kits. The SEFP also supported the purchase of small generators
running on coconut oil. However, a long-term effort was needed to scale up rural
electrification work. At a minimum, this included the completion of a Rural Electrification
Master Plan to identify best options for rural villages, putting in place a transparent legal and
regulatory framework for small-scale independent power production and determining
associated pricing and possible capital subsidies.
7. SIEA was central to achieving improvements in the energy sector. It was critical that SIEA
perform as a strong and capable institution to address the abovementioned energy sector issues. The
objective was that SIEA be strengthened and in a position to lead the sector from a high-cost, oil-based
system primarily centering only on Honiara to a more balanced, less-costly, and stable sector providing
energy services throughout the Solomon Islands.8. The project was aligned with the World Bank’s strategy for the Solomon Islands as stated in the
Regional Engagement Framework FY2006–2009 for Pacific Islands.
1 The project directly contributed to
the two broad areas identified as areas of engagement. In the first area, the engagement strategy
specified that the World Bank would assist the Government and other donors on public expenditure
management issues to improve the delivery of basic services to communities and provide broader sector
policy advice. In the second area, the World Bank would target specific initiatives to improve the climate
for the private sector such as reforms to the energy sector, telecommunications, financial sector
management, and foreign investment legislation. In addition, the World Bank was to contribute to longterm capacity building and make contributions to the productive sectors, recognizing that rural
communities needed to benefit directly. The project contributed directly to two strategic pillars and focus
areas: Improving the public expenditure management of infrastructure assets and Reducing the costs of
doing business.
9. The project responded to a recommendation from an Operations Evaluation Department (now
the Independent Evaluation Group) evaluation2that found that the World Bank had not been able to make
a satisfactory contribution toward fueling economic growth in the region. The evaluation’s
recommendations included improving expenditure management and removing bottlenecks to private
activity.
10. The project directly responded to a request from the Solomon Islands Government (SIG). In the
Pacific Forum of the Finance Ministers of the Pacific Islands held in Washington, DC in 2005, several Pacific
Island countries requested urgent World Bank support to expand sustainable energy use and energy
efficiency to offset the increased price of oil. The SIG requested financing for additional investments
including restoration of networks, expansion of electricity access, and development of new renewable
energy-based electricity generation capacity. However, under the Honiara Club agreements that were
then under effect, the SIG could not borrow for these investments. The SIG realized that before these
investments could be made, SIEA needed to be strengthened. The commercialization and strengthening
of SIEA therefore became the highest priority.
Theory of Change (Results Chain)
11. Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy Project (SISEP) was designed to be the vehicle that would
lay the foundation for future efforts to develop the energy sector. Any effort to steady the sector, enable
more reliable energy to be provided to customers at lower cost, expand access to rural areas, and partner
with private entities and IFIs to develop the sector required building capacity in management, financial,
and operational areas. Building this capacity is reflected in SISEP’s development objectives of improving
operational efficiency, system reliability, and financial sustainability. SISEP’s three components, namely,
strengthening management, financial operations, and technical operations, each supported all three
aspects of the development objective. Strengthening management, for example, would be instrumental
in improving operational efficiency, system reliability, and financial sustainability, as would technical and
financial operations.
1 Regional Engagement Strategy FY2006–2009 for Pacific Islands, Report No: 32261-EAP.
2 Evaluation of World Bank Assistance to Pacific Member Countries, 1992–2002, Operations Evaluation Department, Report No: 
31940.12. Figure 1 shows the Theory of Change, including a link to longer-term outcomes that SISEP would
contribute to beyond its closing date. Project activities were designed with the assumption that there
would continue to be political commitment to the SOE Act; that government intervention would be
required in resolving SIEA’s debt, in particular from its largest government debtors; and that SIEA would
be compensated for its community service obligations.Figure 1. SISEP Theory of Change Diagram
Note: PPA = Power Purchase Agreement.
Component 1: Strengthening 
Management :
• Engagement of two professional
utility line managers (General
Manager and Commercialization 
Manager)
• Adding a professional Director to 
the Board
• Training of key management 
staff
Component 2: Financial 
Operations
• Commercialization program for 
the Finance Department
• Financial and billing system
implementation
• Preparation and 
Implementation of a Finance 
Accounting model
• Staff training program
Component 3: Technical 
Operations
• Loss reduction program
• Maintenance program for 
Honiara
• Distribution reinforcement 
program
• Consultancy services
• Technical training program for 
engineering staff
• Partnership with the Fiji Electric 
Authority
Key staff hired (Technical General 
Manager, Commercialization 
manager, Independent Board 
director
Studies conducted on tariff 
review, asset valuation, PPAs
Improved cash-flow 
position
Improved 
ability of 
SIEA to 
achieve 
energy 
sector goals 
such as 
expanding 
energy 
access, 
affordable 
energy, etc.
Activities Outputs Intermediate 
Outcomes PDOs/Outcomes
Long term 
Outcomes
Improved decision 
making, 
management 
structure, and 
capacity
Reduction in 
network outages in 
frequency and 
duration
• SIEA in financial 
distress leading
to 
underinvestment 
in network
infrastructure
• High costs and 
poor electricity
reliability
• Access to 
electricity is low
(only 10% of 
households)
Training provided (Finance, 
Engineering)
Technical assistance provided for 
improved financial management, 
accounting, procurement 
processes
Rehabilitation of Generation 
infrastructure
Rehabilitation of transmission 
and distribution infrastructure
Support to Owner’s Engineer –
supervision of distribution, 
rehabilitation, and generation 
upgrades
Reduction of non-technical 
losses, improved collections , new 
IT system installed
Issues
1
2
Critical Assumptions: 1: Continued political commitment to 
the SOE act of 2007, SOE regulation of 2010; 2: Managing 
debt burden, particularly from largest government debtors, 
would require government intervention and resolution
Improved 
operational 
efficiency 
of SIEA
Improved 
financial 
sustainability 
of SIEA
Improved 
system 
reliability 
of SIEAProject Development Objectives (PDOs)
13. The PDO, as stated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and in the Financing Agreement of
SISEP (or ‘the project’), was to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability
of SIEA through: improved financial and operational management, reduction of losses, improved
generator and distribution system reliability and increased revenue collection.
Key Expected Outcomes and Outcome Indicators
14. The project was intended to be the foundational investment for an ambitious program of
support for the energy sector in the Solomon Islands. As the first in a series of necessary steps to achieve
a sustainable and affordable energy supply for the Solomon Islands, the planned project outcome was to
restore SIEA to financial and operational health and build capacity so that it could play a central role in
meeting energy sector goals. A strong and capable SIEA was a precondition for the SIG to undertake
concerted action on a variety of fronts including developing new generation sources, working in
partnership with IFIs to implement projects to further energy sector goals, and providing a reliable and
stable foundation in energy access necessary for economic growth.
15. Assessment of the outcomes is organized in terms of the three outcomes of the PDO. They were
(a) Outcome I: To improve the operational efficiency of SIEA, (b) Outcome II: To improve system reliability
of SIEA, and (c) Outcome III: To improve financial sustainability of SIEA. While each of the outcomes
contributed to improving SIEA, the PAD’s arrangements for results monitoring lists one project outcome
indicator, namely, that SIEA will operate profitably. This is consistent with the overarching goal of
improving SIEA’s capacity to meet energy sector goals. Each outcome and associated intermediate
outcomes contribute to other outcomes supported by the project, with SIEA being able to operate
profitably being an overarching goal for SISEP.
16. The Results Framework in the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) is used to
evaluate SISEP’s outcomes. SISEP’s PAD listed four key indicators against which project achievements
were to be assessed. The indicators in the PAD were largely reflected in ISRs but insufficient to measure
all three parts of the PDO. On the other hand, the ISR’s Results Framework included additional indicators
which were relevant to measuring project outcomes and were necessary and sufficient in measuring
achievements of the three components of the PDO. The PDO indicators in ISRs and those in the PAD were
largely aligned, had no material discrepancy, and partially overlapped. Eight of nine PDO-level indicators
in the ISR are used to evaluate achievement of outcomes. One indicator, the collection ratio, was found
to have significant methodological errors which disqualified it from being an appropriate indicator and
was not used in this assessment. Further information is available in the Monitoring and Evaluation section.
In addition, one intermediate outcome indicator was used as an outcome indicator as it was more
reflective of a PDO outcome.
17. For the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR), the Results Framework was
revisited to best reflect achievement of outcomes. As mentioned, the ISR’s Results Framework was used
in evaluating achievement of outcomes. However, to align indicators with objectives, a reorganization of
indicators and mapping to the three subobjectives of the PDO was necessary. Success in achieving
Outcome I, namely, improving operational efficiency of SIEA, is assessed in part by evaluating SIEA’s
success in implementing a commercialization program. While ISRs did not mention the commercializationprogram, three indicators present in ISRs were appropriate measures to assess the commercialization 
program’s achievements. The list of the indicators used to assess outcomes is shown in table 1. 
Table 1. Outcome Indicators Mapped to Relevant Project Objectives
Outcome Relevant Outcome Indicators from the Results Frameworka
Improved operational 
efficiency of SIEA
I.A. System Losses (Baseline: 27 percent; Target: 18 percent)
I.B. Average number of debtor days to collect billed revenue (Baseline: 360 days;
Target: 35 days)
I.C. Number of days between due date of tariff and if not paid notice of arrears
(Baseline: 360 days; Target: 15 days)
I.D. Quarterly financial management reports and rolling projections for SIEA
performance within 14 days at the end of each quarter (Baseline: No Reports
produced; Target: Reports produced)
Improved system 
reliability of SIEA
II.A. System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI) (Baseline: 51840; Target:
2000)
II.B. System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI) (Baseline: 816; Target: 85)
Improved financial 
sustainability of SIEA
III.A. Revenue per kWh generated (Baseline: SBD 1.39/kWh; Target: SBD 4.5/kWh)
III.B SIEA profitability (Baseline: Loss SBD 44 million; Target: Profit SBD 98 million)
Note: a. Targets after last restructuring expected at the end of project life.
Components
18. The project had three components:
(a) Strengthening Management (IDA: US$4.0 million, US$3.69 disbursed; SIG:
3 US$5.4
million). Engagement of two professional utility line managers (a general manager with a
technical background and a commercialization manager) and a professional director to the
Board, and training of key management staff
(b) Financial Operations (IDA: US$0.7 million, US$0.64 disbursed; SIG: US$0.8 million).
Implementation of a commercialization program for the Finance Department, including new
financial management (FM) and billing systems and preparation and implementation of a
new Finance Accounting Manual with a staff training program.
(c) Technical Operations (IDA: US$8.0 million, US$7.37 disbursed; SIG: US$2.0 million).
Implementation of a loss reduction program, a planned maintenance program for Honiara,
and a distribution reinforcement program to increase the availability of existing generation
and improve system reliability. Technical project implementation support to SIEA was also
to be provided with consultancy services, a technical training program for engineering staff,
and establishment of a partnership with the Fiji Electricity Authority (FEA).
3 SIG contribution and estimation of project components costs are equal to actual component costs.B. SIGNIFICANT CHANGES DURING IMPLEMENTATION (IF APPLICABLE)
Revised PDOs and Outcome Targets 
19. The PDO remained essentially unchanged during project implementation. The original PDO was
to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of SIEA through: improved
financial and operational management, reduction of losses, improved generator and distribution system
reliability and increased revenue collection. A minor change to the PDO was the deletion of the part of
the PDO that described project activities, leaving the core PDO unchanged. The revised PDO of the project
was to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of SIEA. It remained
in effect until the project closed in March 2019.
20. SISEP’s outcome indicator targets were revised several times during project implementation.
The purpose of revising targets was primarily to make them consistent with the objectives of restructuring
or to make adjustments consistent with increased ambition such as with the additional financing (AF)
approved in 2014. SISEP was restructured four times during implementation. With each restructuring, the
project attempted to either increase the ambition of outcomes to be consistent with increased financing
or to adjust to be more realistic in setting appropriate goals in achieving project outcomes without
compromising the objective. Outcome targets that were revised are noted below along with a brief
explanation of the reason for revision:
(a) SAIDI and SAIFI indicators. The target value was adjusted downwards at the time of approval
of the AF to account for outcomes expected to accrue from activities that were financed.
This included capital investments to strengthen the largest power grid (Honiara) and
improve the efficiency and reliability of power supplies, a desirable outcome that would be
measurable through SAIDI and SAIFI indicators.
(b) System losses. The target for system losses was revised at three of the four restructurings
of the project. At the first restructuring in FY2011, the target for system losses was made
more stringent, going from 16 percent to 12 percent. In the next restructuring in 2017, the
target was increased to 14 percent, and further increased to 18 percent. The final target of
18 percent was arrived at by considering a realistic reach, that is, setting the target to one
that is achievable due to project activities, but without compromising on the ambition of the
outcome to be achieved.
(c) Collection ratio. The target for collection ratio was lowered from 90 percent to 70 percent
in the final restructuring in 2018. This ICR finds that there were several issues with this
indicator (discussed in the Monitoring and Evaluation section), one of which was that an
unrealistic target was set at appraisal with the appropriate level of ambition being
overstated.
(d) Number of days between due date of tariff and, if not paid, notice of arrears and average
number of debtor days to collect billed revenue. The outcome targets for both indicators
were made more stringent at the time of AF approval, as the team expected the increased
investment to result in incremental improvements by the new closing date. However,subsequent restructurings reverted the targets to ones that were more relevant and 
reflected appropriate goals.
21. As mentioned, SISEP was restructured four times during implementation. Table 2 summarizes key
changes made to the project.
Table 2. Key Changes to SISEP during Implementation
Restructuring Changes
No. Date PDO PDO Indicators PDO Targets
Closing 
Date
Other
1 March 2012 Revised to 
reflect new 
closing date
Extended 
to June 
2014
2 February 
2014 
(including 
AF)
Revised to 
delete 
description of 
project 
activities
3 indicators 
dropped 
(revenue per 
kWh, prepaid 
meters installed, 
and SIEA 
profitability)
Revised to 
account for 
incremental 
improvement 
with increased 
AF investments
Extended 
to June 30, 
2017
Capital investments in the 
Honiara power grid and
strengthening of project 
management
3 April 2017 Targets for 3 
indicators 
revised to 
rectify 
overstated 
targets (system 
losses and
number of 
debtor days to 
collect revenue, 
days between 
due date of 
tariff and notice 
of arrears)
Extended 
to March 
31, 2019
• Change in components and
cost
• Change in loan Closing
date(s)
• Change in financing plan
• Change in implementation
schedule
4 April 2018 Dropped 
indicator related 
to generators
Collection ratio 
target lowered
and number of 
debtor days to 
collect billed 
revenue 
increased. Both 
indicators were 
adjusted to 
reflect a 
feasible but 
sufficiently 
ambitious goal.
Two indicators 
Cancelled US$3.3 million
because of project savingsRestructuring Changes
No. Date PDO PDO Indicators PDO Targets
Closing 
Date
Other
were 
reinstated.
Revised PDO Indicators
22. During project implementation, two PDO-level indicators were dropped. Separately, two other
indicators were dropped and reinstated:
(a) Number of prepaid meters installed. This indicator was dropped when the AF was approved
and SISEP was restructured. At the time, the installation of prepayment meters across all
households in Honiara had been completed and SIEA had a policy in place requiring all new
meters and meter replacements for household customers to be prepayment meters. This
indicator does not qualify for assessing PDO-level objectives and would not have been used
to assess outcomes.
(b) Generator efficiency improved. This indicator became obsolete and was dropped when the
project was restructured in 2018. At appraisal, the plan was to track the efficiency of three
specific generators. However, almost 10 years after project approval, two of the generators
were old and new generators had been purchased by SIEA without the support of project
funds to compensate for deficiency of the old generators. SIEA had measures in place to
ensure that overall efficiency of generators was adequate. The overall efficiency exceeded
90 percent at the time of restructuring when the indicator was dropped (target for all three
generators was 85 percent). Reliability could also be gauged by the System Losses indicator.
(c) The PDO indicator ‘Revenue generated per kWh’ was dropped in error after the 2014
restructuring as it was deemed that this was already captured through the collection ratio
and loss reduction ratio and Component 2 had closed. The intermediate outcome indicator
‘Net profit before tax’ was also dropped because of the consideration that an absolute profit
figure is not very meaningful. The indicators were reinstated to measure the financial
sustainability of SIEA for evaluating the project at completion.
Revised Components
23. Revisions were made to Components 1 and 3 by the addition of the following activities financed
by the AF approved in February 2014:
• Component 1: Strengthening Management. Technical assistance and training on dispatch
and control, system planning, and integration of renewable and independent power
producers; support to owner’s engineer; funding for the Capital Projects Manager 2014–
2017; finance and due diligence technical assistance (legal officer, finance officer, and
procurement officer for PPAs); additional support for training in project management and
technical assistance for strengthening project management; and preparation of feasibility
engineering services and safeguard studies for renewable energy activities.• Component 3: Technical Operations. Upgrade of transformer capacity with an additional 5
MVA 33 kV/11 kV transformer, addition of a second 33 kV switchboard, and a new system
control room and dispatch at Ranadi; a 12.5 MVA transformer and upgrade of switching
arrangements at Lungga Power Station; New Zone substation for transforming 33 kV/11 kV,
with wa 7.5 MVA transformer at Kola’a Ridge; and relocation of the second power circuit to
supply the residential area to the south of Honiara Airport (Feeder 12 area) by building a
new overhead power line and an underground circuit around the airport that links to the
East Honiara Substation to the Feeder 12 area.
Other Changes
24. US$3.3 million was canceled from the IDA credit during the fourth restructuring in April 2018.
Cost savings were achieved under Components 1 and 3 mostly because several contracts were less than
the original estimates. SIEA also decided to fund installation of the Lungga transformer from its own funds.
These funds were reallocated to another project with SIEA which was approved in July 2018.4
25. Change in project costs. Table 3 shows changes in project costs (US$ million) as a result of the AF
and cancellation.
Table 3. Project Costs at Approval and after Approval of AF and each Restructuring
Rationale for Changes and Their Implication on the Original Theory of Change
26. While SISEP was restructured four times, the most substantial change occurred when the AF
along with restructuring was approved in 2014. The original project had been successful in improving
commercial sustainability. As a next step, SIEA needed to undertake long-overdue investments in the
generation, transmission, and distribution infrastructure to improve service to customers. With its
financial position being relatively secure, SIEA was in a position to invest in infrastructure rehabilitation
and maintenance. US$13 million was approved in the AF, of which US$10.3 million was allocated to
technical operations. These involved improving the reliability of electricity supplies in Honiara which is
4 GEF Electricity Access and Renewable Energy Expansion Project (P162902). both the political and commercial capital and where 90 percent of the electricity is generated and 
consumed. Not only was this critically important for economic growth, but the weight of Honiara in 
determining a national uniform tariff was expected to have a large impact on the affordability of power 
across the Solomon Islands.
27. There was no impact on the original Theory of Change. The PDO was essentially unchanged
except for the deletion of the portion of the PDO that described how the objectives were to be achieved.
Other changes included the addition of activities as a result of the AF being approved, which strengthened
existing components (1 and 3) of the project but did not have an impact on the results chain. Finally, PDO
indicators and targets were revised during implementation. Their revisions had a marginal impact on
indicator targets and were not material in the measurement of PDO outcomes.
II. OUTCOME
A. RELEVANCE OF PDOs
Assessment of Relevance of PDOs and Rating
28. SISEP’s PDO remains highly relevant to the development needs of the Solomon Islands. The
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for the Solomon Islands,
5
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for the Solomon Islands FY2018–FY2023,
6
the SIG’s own program (National Development Strategy [NDS]
2016–2035 and Medium-Term Development Plan 2016–2020), explicitly state the need to further
progress on development objectives supported by this project.
29. The current CPF 2018–2023 as well as the Engagement Framework7 at the time of project
approval identify building government capacity for service delivery as a priority. SISEP’s development
objectives were to improve operational efficiency, system reliability, and financial sustainability of SIEA.
The Country Engagement Framework at the time of project approval identified reducing the cost of doing
business through utility regulation and reform and improving rural access to energy as objectives for the
energy sector. The current CPF 2018–2023 states that the previous Country Partnership Strategy program
faced implementation challenges in reaching some objectives in several areas, one of which is reducing
energy losses. In addition, service delivery in remote rural areas and outer islands was stated to be
challenging. The current CPF is organized among three focus areas: (a) strengthening the foundations of
well-being, (b) promoting inclusive and sustainable growth, and (c) managing uneven development. The
development objectives of SISEP support all three focus areas. Support to two of the three focus areas
directly translate to energy-related CPF objectives, as shown in table 4.
5 Solomon Islands Systematic Country Diagnostic, Priorities for Supporting Poverty Reduction and Promoting Shared Prosperity, 
Report No. 115425-SB, World Bank Group, June 2017.
6 Country Partnership Framework for Solomon Islands for the Period FY2018–FY2023, Report No. 122600-SB, World Bank 
Group, June 2018.
7 Regional Engagement Framework for the Pacific Islands FY2006–FY2009, Report No. 32261-EAP, World Bank, May 2005.Table 4. Energy-related CPF Objectives in the Solomon Islands’ Current CPF Program
CPF Focus Areas Relevant to SISEP Objectives CPF Objectives
Strengthening the foundations of well-being Improve renewable power generation and access to 
electricity
Managing uneven development Improve connectivity
Improve access to service delivery in underserved 
communities
30. It is evident that SISEP’s objectives are highly relevant to the CPF objectives, as shown in table 4.
The CPF further elaborates that limited access to affordable and reliable power supply in the Solomon
Islands constrains economic growth in urban areas and contributes to poverty in rural areas. Improving
access to affordable and reliable power was deemed an essential ingredient in not only helping ensure
that future growth is sustained but also lasting peace and stability is secured. SISEP’s objective of
improving operational efficiency, financial sustainability, and system reliability of SIEA was a key step in
the project improving access to electricity and to service delivery.
31. The SCD identified access to energy as a Tier 3 priority. Included in Tier 3 priorities were areas
where the World Bank Group already had a successful engagement. The SCD noted that energy utilities,
along with water, waste disposal, and sanitation, were largely absent beyond urban areas. It deemed
connective infrastructure as critical to facilitate access to the state and its services. One priority identified
was full coverage of essential services in Honiara which would support essential service provision in
smaller centers and beyond by lowering the unit cost of these services. The functioning and connectivity
of Honiara was considered critical to security because private sector activity in the urban service economy
could be a key channel for the redistribution of natural resource rents in the broader economy. Access to
electricity for lighting in Honiara was 72 percent and 42 percent in provinces not including Honiara. The
total access rate of electricity for lighting in the Solomon Islands was 45 percent. SISEP’s objectives of
making SIEA a viable and healthy utility continue to be relevant in improving access to service delivery in
rural and provincial communities.
32. SISEP is well aligned with the Government’s own NDS 2016–2035 and Medium-Term
Development Plan (MTDP) 2016–2020. The NDS goals are (a) sustained and inclusive economic growth;
(b) poverty alleviated across the whole of the Solomon Islands, basic needs addressed, and food security
improved, with the benefits of development more equitably distributed; (c) access for all Solomon
Islanders to good-quality social services, including education and health; (d) resilient and environmentally
sustainable development with effective disaster risk management; and (e) a unified nation with stable
and effective governance and public order. The NDS stresses the importance of good governance and
public sector reforms as fundamental conditions for private sector growth. The MTDP maps the NDS’s
long-term development objectives into 15 medium-term strategies (MTSs). Listed below are relevant
MTSs that are supported by SISEP:
• MTS2: Improve the environment for private sector development and increase investment
opportunities for all Solomon Islanders
• MTS3: Expand and upgrade weather-resilient infrastructure and utilities focused on access
to productive resources and markets to essential services• MTS5: Alleviate poverty, improve provision of basic needs, and increase food security
33. Rating. At the time of project completion, the PDO remained very relevant. As described, it is
evident that SISEP’s PDO was relevant to the World Bank Group’s current country strategy, as well as the
Government’s own national development plans. The PDO is directly in line with the development needs
of the Solomon Islands.
34. The relevance of the PDO is therefore rated as High.
B. ACHIEVEMENT OF PDOs (EFFICACY)
Assessment of Achievement of Each Objective/Outcome
35. SISEP met or exceeded relevant and attributable indicators for all three outcomes associated
with the PDO. Outcomes are assessed for the entirety of the implementation period, rather than with
split ratings for any restructuring for reasons described further in the following paragraphs. Achievement
of the PDO, to improve operational efficiency, system reliability, and financial sustainability of SIEA, is
evaluated by assessing each of the three components of the PDO. Since restructurings made adjustments
to the Results Framework, a split rating by each restructuring period was considered and rejected for the
following reasons: (a) there were no changes to the PDO’s key expected outcomes; the change in PDO
only removed reference to specific means for achieving the respective outcomes, and (b) the
restructurings did not introduce substantial and/or material change to key outcome indicators, project
scope, and the associated level of ambition.
36. Table 5 lists relevant indicators used in the outcome analysis where there was a change in targets,
with comments showing why the level of ambition did not change materially, thereby disposing of the
need for a split rating.Table 5. Changes in Indicator Targets and Relevance for Split ratings
37. An analysis of each element of the PDO is provided in the following paragraphs.
Outcome I: Improve Operational Efficiency
38. The improved operational efficiency aspect, including both technical and nontechnical
components of operational efficiency, is measured by the following indicators:
• I.A: System losses
• I.B: Average number of debtor days to collect billed revenue
• I.C: Number of days between due date of tariff and, if not paid, notice of arrears
• I.D: Quarterly financial management reports and rolling projections for SIEA performance
within 14 days at the end of each quarter
39. At the end of project implementation, all four indicators had exceeded their targets with
outcomes fully attributable to SISEP’s interventions. System losses were 17.3 percent at project close
relative to 27 percent at the start of the project, surpassing the end-project target of 18 percent. The
commercialization program had been implemented successfully. Several management procedures had
been instituted by new board members who were hired and funded by SISEP. These included, for example,
the preparation of detailed reports for management before regular board meetings which were important
for improving transparency and decision making. SIEA had produced quarterly FM reports and rolling
projections for SIEA performance within 14 days after the end of each quarter since 2012. The average
number of debtor days to collect billed revenue was 33.61 days relative to the target of 35 days and a
baseline of 360 days. Customers were provided with invoices that clearly showed the current month’s
charges as well as previous months’ charges with the notification that previous months’ balances weredue immediately. The invoice containing the due date of the tariff, notification of when the account would 
be in arrears (15 days after the due date of the tariff), and amounts in arrears was sent each month, thus 
meeting the indicator target of 15 days.
40. Achieving the objective of operational efficiency can be substantially attributed to activities
financed by a component of SISEP which financed strengthening management and building capacity of
key staff. The component financed key management positions: a technical general manager, a
commercialization manager, and an external board director. Infusion of professional management staff
who introduced new initiatives—corporate planning workshops, strengthened board meetings including
relevant reports, key performance indicators (KPIs), and company rules—revitalized SIEA. The
management launched customer surveys, reviewed debtor accounts, and made examples of intransigent
customers (including government ministries) by cutting off service. Board directors were provided training
and bonuses were linked to performance. SIEA was restructured organizationally after a human resources
review. Management strengthening activities funded by SISEP had a direct bearing on the improvement
in operational efficiency.
41. Covenants included in SISEP were key in contributing to the success of the management
strengthening component. Management strengthening was considered a fundamental aspect in
achieving SISEP’s goal which was to ensure the viability of SIEA by improving operational efficiency, system
reliability, and financial sustainability. At appraisal, the project team considered management
strengthening critical to SIEA and included the following covenants to ensure SIEA health. The covenants
directly corresponded to outcome indicators that measured operational efficiency.
• SIEA shall appoint a general manager and professional external board member each with
qualifications and on terms acceptable to IDA.
• SIEA shall ensure that (a) its annual bill collection from SOEs and other government entities
will be at least 75 percent of what is due and (b) arrears owed to it by SOEs and other
government entities will not exceed more than 120 days.
• SIEA shall no later than November 30 of each year of project implementation prepare an
annual rolling business plan with financial forecasts covering at least 7 years and have such
plans discussed among the project implementing entity’s Board, management, and IDA.
42. Covenants were fully or partially complied with throughout project implementation. Efficacy
rating for improving SIEA’s operational efficiency is rated as High.
Outcome II: Improve System Reliability
43. SISEP included substantial investments to improve system reliability. Two indicators measured
the aspect of improving system reliability:
• II.A: System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI)
• II.B: System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI)44. Targets were met and exceeded at project closing with SAIDI and SAIFI indicators showing
dramatic improvements compared to the baseline. SAIDI and SAIFI expected outcomes and targets as
described in the PAD’s arrangements for results monitoring were modified in the first ISR and measured
accordingly throughout the project. The change was in the way that the outcomes were communicated
and did not indicate a decrease in ambition. The methodology used to determine SAIDI and SAIFI
outcomes was consistent from the start of the project to its end, providing a robust measure of system
reliability.
45. SIEA’s poor financial position had precluded it from making capital investments in generation,
transmission, and distribution infrastructure and denied it access to commercial financing. With SISEP’s
support, SIEA had demonstrated early noticeable improvements to system reliability by 2014. The SAIDI
had improved from 51,840 at approval to 4,767, and the SAIFI had improved from 816 to 46.2. However,
increased demand and insufficient investment had made power supply unreliable.
46. The World Bank provided support by approving the AF of US$10.3 million from an IDA credit to
directly address reliability and efficiency of electricity supplies to Honiara, the largest city in the Solomon
Islands and its commercial center. At project closure, the SAIDI index was 1,757.6, exceeding the target of
2,000. The SAIFI index was 17.5 versus the target of 85. There is a direct line of sight between
improvements in system reliability and the World Bank’s support as the World Bank and SIEA were the
only two entities active in this area. AF funds made it possible for SIEA to undertake long overdue
investments to improve service to customers. Four network investment subprojects financed by the AF
addressed critical weaknesses in the Honiara distribution network. In doing so, it improved the reliability
of supply on the Guadalcanal grid. The improvement of reliability can also be attributed to the
professional/competent technical management of the utility, which had benefited from SISEP’s
operational efficiency component. The efficacy rating for improving SIEA’s system reliability is High.
Outcome III: Improve Financial Sustainability
47. The improved financial sustainability aspect of the PDO is measured by two indicators:
• III.A: Revenue per kWh generated
• III.B: SIEA profitability
48. Both indicators were mistakenly dropped from ISRs after the project was restructured in April
2014 (along with AF approval) even though annex 1 in the AF paper lists the indicator ‘SIEA will operate
profitably’ as a PDO indicator and ‘Revenue per kWh generated’ as an intermediate outcome indicator.
However, the indicators measuring revenue per kWh and SIEA profitability were reintroduced at the
fourth restructuring to facilitate tracking of this outcome at closing.
49. The achievement of both indicators is in the substantial to high range. At project close, SIEA’s
profitability was SBD 80.1 million against a target of SBD 98.0 million, achieving 82 percent of the intended
outcome. Revenue per kWh generated was SBD 4.64 per kWh versus a target of SBD 4.5 per kWh,
achieving 103 percent of the intended outcome. When viewed in conjunction with revenue per kWh, costs
per kWh generated is an additional metric to reflect SIEA’s financial sustainability. Figure 2 shows costsand revenues per kWh since 2013 (data are not available for previous years). From 2013 onward, revenues 
are substantially higher than costs, which bodes well for SIEA’s financial sustainability.
Figure 2. Cost and Revenues Per kWh Generated
Source: ICR team analysis of data provided by SIEA and from SIEA Annual Reports 2013-2018
50. In addition to the indicators mentioned, additional relevant data are available to demonstrate
SISEP’s success in putting SIEA on a sound financial footing. Profit per kWh can be considered an additional
metric to confirm the success of this outcome. Having made a profit for the past eight years in a row (the
previous operating loss was in 2010), SIEA’s performance in profitability was strong. Figure 3 shows an
increasing trend in profit per kWh for 2011–2018. While the overall trend is positive, the chart shows a
smaller level of profitability in 2017 and 2018. This too, can be considered a success because it meant that
SIEA had the resources to make investments in infrastructure from its own funds.
3.3
2.8
2.3
1.8 2.0 2.1
1.8
5.2
5.5
5.2 5.0
4.5 4.7 4.8
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 (April)
Cost per kWh generated Revenue per kWh generatedFigure 3. Profitability Per kWh Generated (SBD)
Source: ICR team analysis of data provided by SIEA and from SIEA Annual Reports 2010-2018
51. SISEP had a direct role in improving financial sustainability through its support of the
commercialization program. The SIG agreement to resolve SIEA’s debt was a condition of effectiveness
for SISEP. In 2011, SIEA was in financial crisis and close to insolvency with severe cash flow problems and
with poor and inconsistent information available to management. SIEA’s fuel supplier issued a threat to
restrict deliveries which created the risk of power rationing across the capital city and the entire country.
However, by 2013, SIEA effected a dramatic turnaround in financial position and improved its cash flow
position by concentrating on key aspects of the commercialization program that was supported by SISEP.
The Ministry of Finance brokered an agreement between SIEA and the Solomon Islands Water Authority
(SIWA), which was SIEA’s largest customer and debtor. The agreement entailed having 100 percent of
SIWA’s debt to be paid. SIEA implemented improved financial controls and replaced the General Ledger
System and addressed metering fraud at large commercial/industrial customers. A stronger financial
performance also meant that SIEA was in a position to plan and seek capital investments. Commercial
financiers began expressing interest in debt financing of SIEA’s capital investments. SISEP had served its
purpose of strengthening SIEA such that it could contribute to energy sector development. The efficacy
rating for improving SIEA’s financial sustainability is Substantial.
Justification of Overall Efficacy Rating 
52. The overall efficacy rating is High based on high efficacy in improving SIEA’s operational
efficiency, high efficacy in improving SIEA’s system reliability, and substantial efficacy in improving
SIEA’s financial sustainability.
53. Table 6 shows efficacy ratings for each aspect of the PDO based on the achievement ratio.
-0.84
0.63
0.88
0.57
1.08
1.24
1.46
0.85 0.81
1.14
-1.00
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
(April)Table 6. Efficacy Ratings for Each Outcome of the PDO Based on Achievement Ratio
C. EFFICIENCY
Assessment of Efficiency and Rating
Economic Analysis of SISEP
54. The project has achieved the key outcomes with high efficiency based on an economic analysis
as described herein, which is conservative and robust to sensitivity analysis.
55. The economic analysis at completion was conducted at project level considering that major
economic benefits are the joint result of implementing all three project components. The same costbenefit approach was applied: economic benefits considered and quantified are avoided fuel cost and
reduced outage cost while economic costs focused on capital investment and operations and
maintenance (O&M) cost. In sum, at completion, the project has a net present value (NPV) of US$7.12
million (at a 10 percent discount rate) while the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) stands at 24.3
percent, which indicates good economic returns from the project. Considering environmental benefits,
the NPV increased to US$13.31 million and the EIRR improved to 27.1 percent.
Table 7. Summary of Economic Benefits and Costs (US$)
ECONOMIC BENEFITS
Avoided Fuel Cost 304,770
Reduced Outage Cost 13,063,619
ECONOMIC COSTS
Capital Investment 5,879,352O&M 366,066
NET ECONOMIC BENEFIT 7,122,971
EIRR 24.3%
Avoided Green Gas Emission 6,182,994
NET ECONOMIC BENEFIT (incl. environmental benefits) 13,305,965
EIRR (envir. benefit adjusted) 27.1%
56. Other economic benefits, such as customer saving through reduced requirement for autogeneration backup systems, reduced O&M costs, better voltage profile, better power harmonics, and
more system stability, are evident but not included for the following two reasons: (a) to keep the same
economic analysis framework used at appraisal and at AF appraisal and (b) to avoid a disproportional level
of data collection and modeling efforts to quantify these benefits. For these reasons, the analysis is
conservative in underestimating project benefits. Also, the conclusions are robust to sensitivity analysis if
(a) O&M cost increases by 100 percent or 200 percent and (b) the discount rate was determined as about
7 percent using new ‘Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic Analysis of World Bank Projects (2016)’.
57. Harmonized8total ex ante NPV is roughly estimated at US$18.1 million. In comparison, ex post
NPV is lower at US$7.12 million. Two driving factors are the lower-than-expected oil price and reduction
of capital investment from US$17.0 million to US$11.7 million. Harmonized ex ante EIRR has not been
calculated due to methodological constraints and lack of sufficient supporting data. However, the EIRR
calculated at completion demonstrates comparable economic viability of the project broadly consistent
with expectations at appraisal and at the stage of the AF.
Financial Analysis
58. The project is also financially viable and attractive thanks to its positive financial net present value
(FNPV) as well as a financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 21.8 percent, which far exceeds the weighted
average cost of capital (WACC).
59. An ex post financial analysis of the project (not the Solomon Power as an SOE or sector) was also
carried out using a ‘cost-benefit analysis’ with the same discount rate of 10 percent. In sum, at completion,
the project has an FNPV of US$5.63 million while the FIRR stands at 21.8 percent, which far exceeds the
estimated project (WACC) of 3.6 percent. A summary of the results, assumptions, and detailed analysis is
presented in following sections.
Table 8. Summary of Financial Benefits and Costs (US$)
FINANCIAL BENEFITS
Incremental revenue from reduction of loss 6,793,190 
Incremental revenue from reduction of outage 12,520,779 
8 Economic analysis at appraisal only quantified the net economic benefit from avoided fuel cost while the economic analysis at 
AF appraisal focused on reduced outage cost. Therefore, to compare ex ante and ex post net economic return, the two ex ante 
analyses need to be harmonized to the same base year.FINANCIAL COSTS
Capital Investment 9,991,496 
Incremental Fuel & Oil Consumption 3,072,026 
O&M 622,100 
NET FINANCIAL BENEFIT 5,628,347 
FIRR 21.8%
60. The main financial benefits considered in this analysis are tariff revenue from incremental power
consumptions by the customers due to reduction of energy losses and reduction of outage, which is in
line with the two economic benefits examined in economic analysis. However, it is important to point out
that financial benefit from reduction of nontechnical losses is included here because it is a transfer
payment from the customers to SIEA.
61. On the other hand, three main financial costs contributed to achieve the abovementioned
financial benefits: total project capital investment, fuel and oil cost for the incremental power
consumption, and the O&M cost. Here the capital investment included the IDA grant, IDA credit, and the
US$8.20 million equity invested by SIEA.
62. Sensitivity analysis has been performed against annual project O&M cost as well as the discount
rate. In both cases, the FNPV is resilient to the changes.
Financial Sustainability Analysis of SIEA
63. Following SIEA’s implementation of its capital expenditure (CAPEX) program, which included its
equity investment of US$8.2 million in SISEP and a further SBD 350.0 million (US$47.6 million) entirely
from its own equity for other priority projects (the construction of a new powerhouse at Lungga Power
Station and installation of four 2.5 MW diesel generators), the projected financial performance of SIEA
shows that the CAPEX program has had a positive impact on SIEA’s performance. Throughout the future
life of the program, total revenues, operating income, and net profit are projected to increase. Liquidity
is expected to remain high with a current ratio well above 1 (lowest point is 8.5 in 2019). The debt-toequity ratio is not expected to approach 30:70, given SIEA’s aversion to debt, peaking at just 18:82 in 2018,
before falling over the remainder of the program. The profitability of SIEA is projected to increase
gradually over the life of the program, with net profit margins increasing from 17 percent in 2013 to 44.9
percent in 2033 and an average annual net profit of 37.0 percent over 20 years.
Implementation Efficiency
64. Overall, the project achieved a modest level of implementation efficiency due to implementation
delays but significant cost savings.
65. The project closing date was extended from June 30, 2017, to March 31, 2019, due to a significant
delay in the implementation of Procurement Plans and contracts. The main contributors were SIEA’s
inadequate capacity to conduct procurement in adherence to the World Bank’s Procurement Guidelines,
delayed recruitment to critical roles (such as procurement specialist and owner’s engineer), and SIEA’s
inability to source qualified and skilled contractors to carry out the works. On the other hand, US$3.3million saving in project cost was achieved. The saving mainly came from (a) savings in several capital work 
contracts and (b) SIEA’s decision to install a transformer in Lungga by itself using its in-house capacity.
66. Efficiency ratings for the project are noted in the following paragraphs.
Overall Efficiency Rating: Substantial
67. The justification of overall efficiency rating is as follows:
• High economic efficiency demonstrated by a sound NPV of US$7.12 million and a positive EIRR
of 24.3 percent
• High financial efficiency of the project with an attractive FIRR of 27.5 percent compared to
WACC at 2.0 percent
• High financial sustainability of SIEA with average annual net profit of 37.0 percent over 20
years
• Modest implementation efficiency due to a 21-month closing date extension but significant
saving of US$3.3 million
D. JUSTIFICATION OF OVERALL OUTCOME RATING
Overall Outcome Rating: Satisfactory based on High Relevance, High Efficacy, and Substantial Efficiency
68. SISEP was designed, appraised, and approved at a critical time for SIEA and for the Solomon
Islands in the electricity sector. The Government faced a range of issues in the sector, including restoration
of transmission and distribution networks which had been damaged in previous years’ riots; expansion of
electricity access: less than 16 percent of households had access to electricity at the time, with rural access
at only 10 percent; and development of new renewable energy-based generation capacity. Prohibition of
the SIG to borrow for these investments under the Honiara Club agreements meant that strengthening
SIEA became not only a desired outcome but a core requirement, essentially a prerequisite, both for basic
operations and for further sector development.
69. The following is a list of issues faced by SIEA at project start and their status today. SISEP’s
contribution in addressing these issues is also stated here:
(a) At the end of 2007, system reliability was poor. Customers had power interruptions at least
twice a day and the power disruptions were endured for approximately 2.5 hours a day. At
the end of SISEP’s implementation, there was a dramatic improvement in system reliability.
SIEA’s 2018 annual report states that the SAIFI index (measuring the number of times a
customer’s service is interrupted in one year) showed that customers were interrupted 1.45
times a year in 2018. SISEP’s investments in system reliability contributed to this
improvement.
(b) SIEA had serious inefficiencies and was in crisis. In 2011, SIEA faced severe cash flow
problems and was close to insolvency. However, at project close, SIEA’s financial position issound. A 2016 Asian Development Bank (ADB) report9that benchmarked the performance 
of SOEs in Pacific Island countries noted that the Solomon Islands’ SOE portfolio was the 
most profitable portfolio in the Pacific. The report further noted that SIEA represented 47 
percent of the profit and 83 percent of the profit in the SOE portfolio and had contributed 
an average of 70 percent of the portfolio’s net profit since 2010.
Table 8 is a snippet from the ADB report showing benchmarking of Pacific Island SOEs with 
the Solomon Islands at the top of the list.
Table 9. Benchmarking of Pacific Island SOEs 
Source: ADB.
Improvements to SIEA’s financial position are attributed to SISEP’s successful 
implementation of the commercialization program along with other measures undertaken 
(e.g., restructuring of SIEA’s debts). SIEA’s financial position now allows it to pay dividends,
which it has been paying since 2016. In 2018, SIEA invested SBD 30 million in SIG Domestic 
Development Bonds. In addition, SIEA also began a program of capital investment in 
generation, transmission, and distribution infrastructure, which was previously not possible 
because of its poor financial position.
(c) SIEA held a central role in advancing objectives in the energy sector but needed additional
capacity and know-how. At SISEP’s start, there were no other development partners
participating in the energy sector. Their involvement required a strong and capable SIEA with
capacity to partner with them in developing energy sector projects and implementing them.
At SISEP’s close, a substantial number of international partners are involved in the energy
sector. SIEA’s 2018 Annual Report10 names the ADB, Japan International Cooperation
Agency, the New Zealand Government, and the United Arab Emirates Government as
partners in operations. SISEP’s component which strengthened management played a
9 ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2016. Finding Balance 2016: Benchmarking the Performance of State-owned Enterprises in 
Island Countries. https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/192946/finding-balance-2016-soe.pdf.
10 http://solomonpower.com.sb/sites/default/files/Reports/Solomon%20Power%20Annual%20Report%202018.pdf.significant role in building capacity. By 2014, newspaper articles were reporting on SIEA’s 
turnaround, specifically citing World Bank’s support in providing technical assistance and 
expertise.
70. In summary, this ICR assesses that SISEP was highly successful in meeting its objectives. SIEA is
now in a strong position to implement each element of the Government’s planned energy sector
development program. Management has been strengthened, the commercialization program has become
entrenched, and SIEA has invested to further improve system performance.
Table 10. SISEP Final Outcome Ratings
Outcome Ratings
Relevance High
Efficacy
I. Operational Efficiency High
II. System Reliability High
III. Financial Sustainability Substantial
Overall Efficacy High
Efficiency Substantial
Overall Outcome Rating Satisfactory
71. The overall outcome rating is rated as Satisfactory.
E. OTHER OUTCOMES AND IMPACTS (IF ANY)
Gender
72. Gender inequality is generally high in the Solomon Islands. The country ranks 156th on the
gender inequality index.
11 In the energy sector, gender inequality is noticeable. Most positions within the
energy sector are technical roles, and traditionally, majority of women have not considered these types
of roles as viable career paths nor have they been encouraged to pursue these roles by their employers.
The Pacific Power Association benchmarking 2017 (2015 data) reports that 21.3 percent of the total
workforce employed in Pacific power utilities are women, with 4 percent of female representation at
technical levels. SIEA has 21 percent female employee base and 6 percent female employees at technical
level. This places the organization at the top of Pacific regional statistics. However, SIEA is committed to
improving gender equality within the power sector.
73. SISEP was prepared in 2008 when design and documentation of gender tag related aspects in
projects was not required. However, at the time of AF approval, the project explicitly considered the
relationship between improvements in access to reliable, efficient, and affordable electricity and the
empowerment of women by reducing their time and labor burdens and providing opportunities for
enterprise and capacity building. Consultations with the Solomon Islands Women in Business Association
were carried out, which identified issues relating to the quality of power supply and the performance of
SIEA. The design of the AF addressed these issues. The provision of reliable and more economical
11 United Nations Development Programme, Human Development Report 2016.electricity services through upgrades to the power network, as supported by the AF, was in several ways 
also gender neutral—because ‘lights staying on’ benefits all consumers.
74. Strengthened management capacity has meant that SIEA is now committed to tackling gender
inequality within its organizational structure. The World Bank supports SIEA’s commitment to improving
gender equality through energy sector operations approved after SISEP. In particular, the Solomon Islands
Electricity Access and Renewable Energy Expansion Project (SIEAREEP) supports the transformation of
women’s employment in three ways: (a) implementation of a program to employ rural women in
maintaining solar panels and sites, (b) assessment of the main barriers for women to take technical and
managerial roles and designing measures to address these, and (c) support to SIEA to implement genderbased violence policies and to develop respectful and supportive workplaces.
Institutional Strengthening
75. SISEP was designed as a project to strengthen management, increase financial sustainability,
and improve reliability, which was especially important in an environment of low capacity. As such, the
entire project was expected and proceeded to strengthen SIEA. SISEP financed several senior staff
positions in SIEA, including expatriate specialists who infused their knowledge into SIEA operations. Some
positions were required to have candidates with relevant experience—the commercialization manager,
for example, was expected to be experienced in World Bank procedures. There were also many local staff
with excellent and deep knowledge of their country and SIEA operations. The combination of local
knowledge with international know-how greatly enhanced project operations. Project components also
included training in technical and financial topics to increase capacity of staff where needed.
Mobilizing Private Sector Financing
76. As mentioned earlier, SISEP was approved in 2008 at a time when SIEA’s financial position was
precarious. This had led to chronic underinvestment in generation, transmission, and distribution
infrastructure. Therefore, network reliability was inadequate and access to electricity among households
was extremely low. Investment needs were high and private sector solutions needed to be catalyzed to
bridge the investment gap. However, there was limited private sector interest. Private entities required a
counterpart that could partner with them to design and implement energy sector projects, a role that
SIEA found difficult to play at the time of approval.
77. SISEP was instrumental in improving the financial and operational performance of SIEA.
Regulations and pricing were analyzed by a tariff review study supported by the project. Gains brought
about by SISEP made partnering with private entities feasible. A case that demonstrates SIEA’s success in
partnering and implementing such projects is the Tina River Hydropower Development Project (TRHDP)
which is expected to generate 15 MW of electricity and significantly reduce the country’s dependency on
diesel and improve the reliability of power supply. The TRHDP, cofinanced with Australia, the Republic of
Korea’s Economic Development Cooperation Fund, the Green Climate Fund, the Joint Abu Dhabi Fund for
Development and International Renewable Energy Agency, and the ADB, is a good example of the
maximizing finance for development (MFD) approach. The financing package was optimized with the
private sector providing the majority of the equity and the SIG, multilateral development banks, and
donors providing the rest of the equity and all the debt. This structure has helped achieve the lowestpossible electric tariff considering the high cost of the project. SISEP created the appropriate environmentfor private sector involvement. Figure 4
12 shows the MFD approach for the TRHDP and SISEP’s role in 
making it feasible.
Figure 4. SISEP and MFD Approach Used in the TIna River Hydro Development Project
Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity
78. Poverty analysis. The most recent poverty assessment13 showed that based on the Household
Income and Expenditure Survey, 12.7 percent of the population in the Solomon Islands lives below a
Solomon Islands-specific poverty line and are classified as ‘poor’. This poverty line is defined as the
minimum expenditures needed to obtain basic food and non-food goods considering prevailing
consumption patterns in the country. Honiara had the highest basic needs poverty line: meeting basic
needs cost twice as much money in Honiara asin most other provinces due to the higher cost of both food
and non-food goods.
79. A major obstacle in promoting economic development and expanding the use of electricity is the
high average retail electricity tariff of approximately US$0.65 per kWh which is the highest in the Pacific
region and among the highest in the world. The Solomon Islands is almost entirely dependent on imported
refined petroleum fuels for national energy needs for electricity generation, transport, and lighting.
Electricity is supplied to urban centers through diesel generators. In rural areas, the wide distribution of
population and low densities make capital costs of connecting consumers very high relative to revenue
generation. The problem had been further exacerbated by the distorted tariff methodology which did not
benefit end-users appropriately when global oil prices were lower. At the end of 2016, SIEA revised the
12 Source: Country Partnership Framework for Solomon Islands for FY2018–FY2023, Report No. 122600-SB, World Bank Group, 
2018. 
13 Solomon Islands’ poverty profile based on the 2012/13 HIES, World Bank, 2015; 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/922811528186449003/pdf/Solomon-Islands-Poverty-Assessment.pdf.tariff methodology so that the benefit of lower generation cost will be adequately passed on to electricity
users.
80. To reduce exposure to volatile global oil prices and to enhance energy security, the SIG aims to
increase the share of renewable energy to 50 percent of total installed capacity by 2020. The SIEAREEP
will facilitate access to additional people to electricity networks while improving sustainability and
affordability through the replacement of diesel generation with more affordable sources of power. The
SIEAREEP’s economic analysis identified that the project will avoid over US$21.6 million in diesel-related
costs which will facilitate tariff reduction by reducing the level of diesel dependency, generating clean and
sustainable energy and subsidizing connections to over 1,500 low income families, schools and health
centers.
81. The initial cost to connect to the power system in the Solomon Islands is extremely high. The
World Bank approved the US$2.5 million Electricity Access Expansion Project supported by the Global
Partnership for Output Based Aid in July 2016 to provide targeted subsidies to low-income households to
help new customers pay the initial connection fee and basic in-house wiring for low-income households
which is a major impediment to increasing the electrification rate. In 2017, SIEA advised the World Bank
that the gazettal of the tariff regulation, which enacted a new retail tariff based on the cost of service
study and tariff review, had occurred with new tariffs effective in January 2017. The tariff regulation
resulted in a 20 percent decrease in tariff for large commercial customers and between a 4 percent and
10 percent decrease in tariff for residential customers. In addition, the tariff regulation benefited lowconsumption users by introducing a low-consumption tariff (a baseline tariff) which was lower than the
prevailing tariff rate.
Other Unintended Outcomes and Impacts
82. No unintended outcomes or impacts were recorded by SISEP.
III. KEY FACTORS THAT AFFECTED IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOME
A. KEY FACTORS DURING PREPARATION
83. A primary objective of SISEP was the reform of SIEA, specifically strengthening of management as
a prerequisite to achieving the SIG’s energy sector goals. There were several options that could have
supported the objective of strengthening management. They included (a) award of one or more electricity
supply and/or distribution concessions to private companies, (b) award of a utility management contract
to an outside firm for a specified period with specific performance requirements, or (c) engagement of
external senior managers and/or expert staff to support utility management and operation for a specified
period and help further train local utility managers and staff.
84. Each of the three options for improving management and operational efficiency in SIEA was
considered. An initial concept was to make arrangements for the electricity and Honiara water utility
(SIWA) together, especially because SIWA was the largest debtor to SIEA. However, SIWA did not
participate, and the management contract concept was developed for SIEA alone. Over 30 potentially
interested companies were surveyed regarding their interest in purchasing these franchises, but noneexpressed interest in submitting bids. Five companies did express some potential interest in bidding on a 
management contract if suitable government guarantees were in place.
85. However, as time proceeded, the market for a potential electricity management contract
tightened, with prices for these services increasing sharply, and guarantee requirements over and above
what the Solomon Islands would be able to provide under the Honiara Club agreements. In the meantime,
the experience of the FEA, which had opted to appoint five expatriate managers as part of its own
reorganization in 2002, continued to show strong performance. In light of the emerging FEA experience
and the increasingly less-favorable results with management contracts, the SIG and the World Bank
designed a package of reforms which included the hiring of several senior staff in key positions. The
proposal also included a twinning arrangement between SIEA and FEA.
86. Partnership arrangements. The World Bank worked in close collaboration with partners to
provide support in improving the performance of SOEs in the Solomon Islands. While there was limited
interest from commercial entities to participate in the energy sector, SIEA partnered with a few
development partners to further energy sector goals. RAMSI/Australian Aid supported the electricity
pricing and regulation study as well as the Rural Electrification Master Plan. A study to establish the legal
framework for rural electrification was also planned. The World Bank and other partner agencies worked
in a complementary fashion to further development.
B. KEY FACTORS DURING IMPLEMENTATION
87. SISEP’s initial focus on strengthening management, that is, hiring of key senior staff, produced
early gains which were key to achieving successful outcomes. These early gains are attributed to improved
corporate governance, with appointments to the SIEA board being carried out under the SOE regulations
of 2010 and improved FM and internal audit functions within SIEA. The success of the commercialization
program was crucial in producing a virtuous cycle with regard to objectives—improved financial health
allowed SIEA to invest in capital expenditure to improve service and increase revenue, which in turn led
to a healthier balance sheet. During 2012 and 2013, the SIEA board approved a corporate restructuring
that established an internal audit group focused on meter reading, billing reconciliation, and reducing
theft/meter bypass and created a capital projects management team charged with the planning,
oversight, and delivery of new projects.
88. SIEA’s measures in implementing the commercialization program were necessary but not
sufficient to put its finances on a sustainable trajectory. An important factor was the restructuring of
SIEA’s debt which was long-standing and needed government intervention without which it was unlikely
that SIEA’s financial recovery could be maintained. As mentioned earlier, SIWA was SIEA’s largest debtor.
The SIG had restructured SIWA’s debt to SIEA in 2008 and it was a condition to IDA’s financing of SISEP.
However, this debt settlement agreement was not successful. SIWA continued to operate
noncommercially, did not have the capacity to pay its power bills, and had accumulated the SBD 36.7
million debt to SIEA in the 50-month period between January 2008 and February 2012. It was only in early
2011 that the SIG committed to reforming SIWA, recognizing that without reform at SIWA, SIEA’s largest
customer, attempts to improve the financial sustainability of SIEA were unlikely to succeed. This had an
impact on the development of the Tina River Hydropower Scheme which required SIEA as the power
offtaker to be financially healthy.89. In May 2012, a second SIWA-SIEA debt settlement agreement was signed between the SIG
(Minister of Finance and Treasury and Minister of Mines, Energy, and Rural Electrification); SIEA; and
SIWA. Full settlement of SIWA’s SBD 36.7 million was structured in a way that combined SBD 20 million in
government capital injection into SIWA for onward payment to SIEA, SIEA providing SBD 7.5 million
interest-free loan to SIWA to be repaid over 8 years, and SIEA writing off SBD 9.2 million of SIWA’s debt.
Importantly, unlike the 2008 debt settlement, the one in 2012 worked because SIWA was financially
restructured to operate on a commercial and sustainable basis. SIWA’s tariffs were adjusted so that it
could cover its costs, including for electricity. The agreement increased SIWA’s tariffs over the next three
years, established a mechanism for SIWA’s tariffs to be adjusted quarterly in line with increases in SIEA’s
tariffs, and established a mechanism for SIWA’s tariffs to be adjusted annually in line with the consumer
price index.
90. As mentioned, SIEA wassubstantially dependent on imported refined petroleum fuels for national
energy needs. An improved financial position meant that SIEA could initiate a fuel procurement tender in
2012. High fuel costs were a critical strategic issue for SIEA as fuel purchases accounted for around 60
percent of SIEA’s operating expenditure. Past financial crises at SIEA had been related to cash flow issues
relating to payment of fuel bills. A new fuel contract was negotiated for long-term supply, delivery, and
management of SIEA’s fuel stocks and maintenance and replacement of fuel storage tanks at SIEA power
stations. The contract provided SIEA with a price that was a significant discount on regulated fuel price.
91. The fiscal position of SIEA continues to be strong. SIEA started declaring dividends to the SIG in
2016 and has done so each year thereafter. Dividends of approximately SBD 4 million are declared each
year. In 2018, SIEA invested SBD 30 million in SIG domestic development bonds. SIEA’s annual expenditure
on infrastructure investments totaled SBD 140 million. The Solomon Islands’ current electricity utility is a
vastly different operation than the utility of 2008 when SISEP was approved.
IV. BANK PERFORMANCE, COMPLIANCE ISSUES, AND RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME
A. QUALITY OF MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E)
M&E Design
92. SISEP’s objectives were clearly defined and directly responded to critical issues that SIEA was
facing. At approval, the PDO was complex in that it also described the activities to achieve the PDO in
addition to the PDO itself. This was corrected during implementation. SISEP’s Theory of Change was logical
and could demonstrate the results chain that led from SISEP’s activities leading to intermediate outcomes
progressing on to PDO outcomes. SISEP’s objectives responded directly to the issue identified which was
that energy sector goals of increasing access and affordability could not be addressed until SIEA was a
viable and financially healthy entity.
93. At project design, there was inconsistency in describing PDO-level indicators and intermediate
outcome indicators. The inconsistency appeared in different sections of the PAD, leaving an impression
that the Results Framework was not well thought through. As an example, the PDO-level indicators
described in the project description section in the main body of the PAD were not consistent with the
PDO-level indicators described in annex 3 or in the Results Framework. In addition, inconsistencies wereapparent between the PDO results indicators in annex 3 and the table describing arrangements for results 
monitoring which contained only one PDO indicator (SIEA will operate profitably and with PDO indicators 
listed as intermediate indicators). 
94. The PDO-level indicators were adequate to measure progress and achievement of the project’s
three-part development objective of improving operational efficiency, financial sustainability, and system
reliability of SIEA. The indicators were relevant and time bound. M&E arrangements were made for the
project management team in SIEA to be responsible for M&E.
M&E Implementation
95. There was considerable variability in the structure of the Results Framework throughout
implementation. The intermediate outcome indicators in the PAD’s Annex 3: Arrangements for Results
Monitoring were elevated to PDO-level indicators in the first ISR. However, four indicators were also
retained as intermediate indicators leading to the same indicators being at the PDO level as well as the
intermediate outcome indicator level: (a) SAIDI, (b) SAIFI, (c) revenue generated per kWh, and (d) net
profit before tax. There was no indication that a formal restructuring was conducted to effect these
changes in the ISR.
96. The first ISR after AF approval reflected changes brought about by AF investments. The Results
Framework was amended to include new intermediate outcome indicators which corresponded to
investments that were to be made for network improvements (for example, ‘Commissioning of
switchboard at Ranadi’ and Kola’a ridge substation commissioned’) and the indicators for revenue
generated per kWh and net profit before tax were deleted at PDO and intermediate outcome levels
However, SAIDI and SAIFI remained at both the PDO level and intermediate outcome level. The indicator
‘Number of pre-paid meters installed’ was dropped.
97. The Results Framework was further refined during the third and fourth restructuring. At the
third restructuring, the Results Framework was amended and the duplication of SAIDI and SAIFI was
removed. After the fourth restructuring, the Results Framework was amended once again with the
‘Revenue generated per kWh’ and ‘Net profit before tax’ indicators being reinstated, the latter as an
intermediate outcome indicator. The indicator that measured generator efficiency was dropped.
98. Targets for individual indicators also varied during implementation. At times, targets were made
more stringent with the desire to be accountable for increased investments. The more stringent targets
made sense for some indicators, for example, SAIDI and SAIFI, where one could expect an improvement
in these indexes if additional investments were being made to improve reliability. At other times, a more
stringent target was not advisable such as the increase in ambition from 16 percent to 12 percent at the
first restructuring. An Energy Sector Management Assistance Program study14 suggests that system loss
reductions measured as a combination of technical (for example, heat or copper losses, magnetic losses,
and transformation losses) and nontechnical losses (for example, commercial losses, metering failures
and theft) are difficult to separate. In SIEA’s case, technical losses of approximately 11 percent have been
assumed. A residual target of 1 percent for nontechnical losses was practically not feasible for SISEP. Some
14 Tallapragada, P., M. Shkaratan, A. Izaguirre, J. Helleranta, S. Rahman, and S. Bergman. 2009. Monitoring Performance of 
Electric Utilities: Indicators and Benchmarking in Sub-Saharan Africa. , World Bank. restructurings were conducted with short interval periods with indicator targets amended frequently. 
Considering that the change in targets was not material to the project’s outcome, frequent changes in 
targets was inefficient. 
99. SISEP’s data was collected and analyzed in a methodologically sound manner. The methodology
for most indicators was consistent from the first ISR to the end of the project. However, the methodology
for the collection ratio indicator was not consistent from before project approval and continuing through
project implementation. At the end of project implementation, the collection ratio was 60 percent, lower
than the baseline figure of 72 percent at project approval. The ICR team could not verify that the collection
ratio at the start of the project and at the end of the project was measuring what it purported to measure.
There was substantial variation in collection ratio measurement leading to a situation which made
comparisons at project start and end not possible, leading to the indicator being unusable. A possible
explanation was that newer IT systems for billing installed as part of SISEP may have contributed to this
mismatch. Systems that did the billing were not the same at project start and at project close. It would
have been beneficial to revisit this target earlier in project implementation rather than at a later stage.
The collection ratio was therefore not used in assessment of outcomes.
100. There were instances where the project team took proactive action to correct the stated target
to one that is more appropriate and achievable due to project activities, but without compromising on
the ambition of the outcome to be achieved. These actions are evident in the indicators ‘Average number
of debtor days to collect billed revenue’ and ‘Number of days between due date of tariff and, if not paid,
notice of arrears’. These increases show that the project team was aware that there were shortcomings
in the estimation of an appropriate target and level of ambition and took action to correct it.
101. At first, the project team required assistance to conduct effective M&E implementation. ISRs
reported that an increase in the quality and detail of reporting on the progress toward the project’s
Results Framework indicators was required. This was to be expected with the World Bank and SIEA
working together for the first time. By project close, however, M&E functions were being implemented in
a sound manner and processes are likely to be sustained after project closing.
M&E Utilization
102. The project management team at SIEA produced monthly reports which reported on progress
toward indicators. In addition, specific performance indicators were added to the contracts of the two
professional utility managers. SIEA reported on their progress on a quarterly basis. An arrears report was
mandated for each Board meeting to monitor non-paying SOEs and government entities. The general
manager reported monthly to SIEA’s board on the type of routine generation and network maintenance
activities carried out, including system outages and analysis and estimated costs.
103. In addition to M&E conducted to inform its operations and report to its board, SIEA also gathered
information from customers through a customer survey which allowed it to recalibrate its services based
on consumer demand. Customer surveys are held regularly, with the most recent being held in 2018. One
example of using consumer opinion to retool its services was provided to the ICR team by project
counterparts. One request that came from customers was that more information on the mobile top up
system was desirable. SIEA responded by conducting an information campaign. In addition to activities at
its headquarters in Ranadi, areas with heavy foot traffic were targeted, for example, at Hyundai Mall.Justification of Overall Rating of Quality of M&E
104. SISEP was successful in being able to monitor progress and providing evidence that development
objectives as planned for at project start had been met. In addition to requirements for reporting to IDA, 
SIEA had instituted its own processes of reporting to its board, members of which were avid consumers 
of data provided. However, there were substantial shortcomings in the design of M&E before approval as 
described. Opportunities during implementation to re-examine the Results Framework were not used.
The overall quality of M&E is rated as Modest.
B. ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND FIDUCIARY COMPLIANCE
105. Procurement. At SISEP’s approval in 2008, assessment of SIEA’s capacity to implement 
procurement actions for the project rated the risk as High. SIEA’s structure and capacity was deemed 
insufficient and expenditure control was taking place in a fragmented arrangement. The legal and 
regulatory framework lacked the operational detail necessary for efficient procurement implementation.
There was an absence of procurement planning and procedural tools and the limited number of local 
contractors increased the possibility of saturation, collusion, and nepotism.
106. Project design included a specific action to mitigate the above risks and support SIEA which until 
then had no experience with implementing World Bank procurement procedures. The action plan 
included (a) appointment of a commercialization manager with World Bank procurement experience; (b) 
strengthening of the National Competitive Bidding (NCB) process with the first NCB packages; (c) 
implementation of a procurement planning cycle and the development and implementation of a 
procurement filing system; (d) finalization and implementation of audit procedures; and (e) training for 
SIEA staff on World Bank procurement procedures.
107. By 2014, at AF approval, several lessons were learned, particularly from past International 
Competitive Bidding (ICB) contracts, and were incorporated into the AF project design. Lessons included
the following: (a) qualification requirements need to be appropriate to the size and complexity of the 
work; (b) suitable packaging of contracts into works of sufficient scale is required to attract more 
international bidders to a small, unfamiliar, and remote location like the Solomon Islands; and (c) cost 
estimates need to be more carefully prepared and procurement planning and execution needs to be 
carried out in a more timely manner.
108. The World Bank conducted a post review of signed contracts in January 2019 (two months 
before project closure). The review included contracts for the manager contracts, procurement specialist, 
and environment and social safeguards specialist. The review showed that the agreed procedures were 
followed, the relevant documents on the selection process were on file, and the selected consultants were 
all on the ground with services ongoing at the time of the review. It was recommended that SIEA should 
improve the filing system where procurement activities and documents are stored to make documents 
immediately available.
109. FM. The FM assessment at SISEP’s approval in 2008 rated the risk as Moderate considering the 
total financial commitment to the program, the capacity of SIEA and the structure and complexity of the 
project. FM arrangements were assessed as adequate. The assessment flagged that government capacity 
was dependent on expatriate support but that the accountant general and auditor general were increasingly effective. SIEA had no experience in the delivery of World Bank projects. To mitigate this risk, 
project design included funding for finance training. The SIG hired a professional accounting firm to assist 
SIEA to put in place all required financial reporting systems for this project.
110. During implementation, the FM assessment conducted at the time of AF approval noted that 
there had been significant improvements in SIEA’s FM processes and systems which were reflected in (a) 
an unqualified entity audit in 2012, (b) the 2012 entity audit being completed within the statutory time 
period after the end of the fiscal year, and (c) SIEA implementing a new and more robust billing and ledger 
system, effective January 1, 2014.
111. An FM implementation review was conducted in March 2018. FM performance was then 
reassessed to Moderately Satisfactory because while accounts were well maintained, improvement was 
required in managing the commitments register on active projects. The commitments register is an 
important management tool to monitor all committed funds versus project-available funds and help 
identify project funds that remain uncommitted and is an effective way of monitoring contract payments.
SIEA is tasked with updating the commitments register to monitor active projects. At project closing, no 
material issues are evident in the FM area.
112. One year before project closure, US$3.3 million was canceled as SIEA, now financially on its feet, 
decided to fund some of SISEP’s activities from its own funds. At SISEP’s closing, approximately US$0.9 
million is expected to remain undisbursed. On one hand, this can be viewed as a positive development—
SISEP had met its objectives to make SIEA financially sound and could now fund its own capital 
expenditures. On the other hand, project funds remaining undisbursed at the end of the project is likely 
due to inexact estimates of funds needed at the time of cancellation.
113. Safeguards. At SISEP’s approval in 2008, the project’s environmental category was rated as C,
which reflected the fact that proposed investments were essentially replacement of distribution feeders, 
upgrading of other network distribution elements including transformers to reduce network losses, and 
replacement of existing meters with prepaid meters. Existing generation facilities were being provided 
with the necessary spare parts to improve the reliability and efficiency. SISEP’s focus was on institutional 
strengthening, technical assistance, and commercialization through improved FM, improved accounting 
systems, and operational IT support. Hence, no environmental or safeguard policies were triggered by 
investments proposed in the loan approved in 2008.
114. The environment category for SISEP changed from Category C under the original project to 
Category B under the AF as new activities that were being financed triggered OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental 
Assessment). Activities financed by the AF took place within the confines of existing facilities on land 
leased by SIEA. There was no land acquisition or involuntary resettlement arising from AF activities. SISEP 
had an urban context and no indigenous peoples as defined under OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) were 
located in the project’s area of influence. The project’s ESMF stated that the proposed new subprojects 
would cause no major social or environmental impacts and that minor impacts could be readily mitigated 
and resolved. 
115. During implementation of AF activities, SIEA’s contractor managed environment and social 
matters during construction of capital works with oversight by SIEA. As part of the capital works, SIEA 
managed the planned temporary closure of a Honiara road for approximately one week. The closure of an approximate 60 m section of road (30 m on either side of the site of work) restricted the entrance to 
several houses and canteens. SIEA and the contractor notified residents and maintained pedestrian access 
during the majority of construction so as to minimize disruption. The details of any compensation of the 
businesses along the section of road were shared with the World Bank before construction. 
C. BANK PERFORMANCE
Quality at Entry
Rating: Satisfactory
116. SISEP was conceptualized, designed, and approved at a time that was critical for SIEA. The agency 
was close to insolvency and had difficulty in obtaining fuel to maintain its operations. Strengthening SIEA 
in operational, financial, and quality of service areas was critically important for SIEA to perform basic 
functions of a power utility. SISEP was the first financial engagement undertaken by the World Bank in the 
energy sector in the Solomon Islands. Emerging from conflict, needs were huge, but no financiers would
partner with SIEA as they needed a viable and healthy power utility to do business with. An IDA grant to 
restore the health of SIEA was the right choice. SISEP was therefore highly suited to support SIEA at that 
point in time.
117. While SISEP was the World Bank’s first financing package in the Solomon Islands, support in the 
form of technical assistance and expertise had been ongoing since 2005. The initial World Bank 
engagement in 2005–2007 involved conducting diagnostics on both the power and water utilities and 
providing expertise on financial recovery plans for SIWA and SIEA. This made sense because the 
performance of both utilities had a substantial impact on each other. One proposed reform was a 
management contract/concession covering both SIWA and SIEA in 2007 which was not supported. A 
power management contract was tendered in 2007, but there was not enough interest. Regarding 
restructuring SIWA, there was no political or board or management support in 2007. Reform efforts then 
focused on SIEA and SISEP was approved with IDA financing in 2008.
118. SISEP was designed to place the energy sector of the Solomon Islands on a sustainable footing.
Key operating aspects that helped neighboring Pacific Island states, for example, the FEA, achieve success 
were considered and largely incorporated in the design of SISEP. These included (a) the adoption of a 
strong FM system, with a focus on collection, with customers who are late in paying their tariffs receiving 
notices within 2 to 3 days after missed payments; (b) the introduction of prepaid meters, for which prepaid 
cards could be bought through local retail stores; (c) commitment from the Government to exercise due 
diligence in payment collections and, if necessary, cut off non-paying customers including SOEs; (d) 
outsourcing of maintenance and repair services while inspecting the level of services provided by their 
contractors; and (e) an active long-term human resource planning methodology, focusing on on-the-job 
training for both management and operators.
119. At approval, SISEP met readiness criteria for implementation. Procurement Plans had been 
formulated for the first 18 months and a General Procurement Notice was published. Advertisements and 
Expressions of Interest notices had been placed to procurement of the commercialization component. 
Procurement packages for IT systems had been defined and a Request for Expressions of Interest was 
ready to be published as soon as the project had been approved by the Board. 120. Project design acknowledged and mitigated for critical risks. Two substantial risks were identified.
The first included a lack of capacity in the Government which was mitigated by making sure that the 
commercialization manager was appointed with qualifications acceptable to IDA. This was a condition of 
effectiveness. A second significant risk was a highly volatile political environment and the lack of 
commitment in commercializing SIEA. To mitigate this risk, the SIG agreed to restructure SIEA’s debt 
before negotiations commenced for SISEP.
Quality of Supervision
Rating: Moderately Satisfactory
121. Project supervision was substantial after project effectiveness. Supervision missions were carried 
out regularly, averaging every four months, including field visits and physical checks of investments. The 
project’s task team leaders were based in the Sydney office during the entire life of the project. This 
resulted in well-facilitated client engagement. The World Bank office in Honiara also provided support as 
needed. Critical issues were identified early and collaborative solutions were found with SIEA. The project 
record shows evidence of detailed ISRs and Aide Memoires.
122. Project teams were sensitive to needs that arose during implementation and accordingly 
restructured as needed. This ICR could not find evidence of a midterm review (MTR) though it is likely that 
frequent restructuring played the same role as would an MTR. The project was restructured four times, 
one of which also included the AF. The last two restructurings were at the tail end of the project—one 
and two years before closure. It could have been useful to consolidate these two restructurings. The 
project was extended thrice, which provided time needed for completion of activities without 
compromising the project’s performance.
Justification of Overall Rating of Bank Performance
Overall Rating of Bank Performance: Moderately Satisfactory
123. The quality of entry and quality of supervision aspects have been assessed to be Satisfactory and 
Moderately Satisfactory, respectively. A few shortcomings as described above were not sufficiently severe 
to compromise the project. The World Bank team and government counterparts worked to keep the 
project on track and brought the project to a satisfactory closure.
D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME
124. The main risk to a sustainable development outcome is government commitment to the SOE 
Act of 2007 and regulation of 2010. However, it is important to note that SIEA’s performance in turning 
things around was strongly predicated on using provisions in the SOE Law. Improved corporate 
governance followed from appointments to the SIEA Board being carried out under the SOE Law. SIEA’s 
road to financial sustainability was helped by the SOE Law which required SOEs to operate profitably. SIEA 
was able to disconnect non-paying consumers, including government agencies. Today government
commitment to the SOE Act appears to be firm. If the government’s commitment wavers, the risk of 
utilities falling back into insolvency is real.125. There is also a risk that affordability and access goals will remain a challenge. The risk to their 
alleviation is mitigated by the fact that ongoing efforts by the SIG and other development partners are 
directly tackling these issues, including the World Bank through its SIEAREEP project. SISEP has achieved 
its objective in strengthening SIEA’s position to contribute to holistic sector development. It is likely that 
financial sustainability will persist despite investments in improving access and affordability based on 
financial projections. SIEA is now in a better position to strike and maintain the right balance of the 
different sector objectives embodied in Sustainable Development Goal 7 (Ensure access to affordable, 
reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all).
V. LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
126. A robust regulatory environment is vital to successful reform of SOEs. The SOE Act of 2007 and 
2010 SOE regulations provided a robust framework for SOE governance accountability and performance.
The law required SIEA to operate profitably, a consequence of which is that SIEA operated as a private
firm to the extent possible. The law set down corporate reporting requirements. The process to select and 
appoint directors needed to follow the law with members selected on the basis of technical and
professional expertise rather than political appointments. The financing of community service obligations 
was required to be transparent following an equally open planning and costing process. The SOE law was 
the backbone of the effort to turn around SIEA, without which it is doubtful that the project could have 
succeeded.
127. Political commitment is an essential ingredient to success in turning around SOEs. The crisis at 
SIEA prompted sufficient government commitment to enable reforms to proceed. The Ministry of Finance 
had a large role to play in removing debt from SIEA’s accounts. A deal was brokered to have SIWA’s debts,
which had accumulated from 2008, paid to SIEA. Electricity bills of other government entities were also 
paid on time with the Ministry of Finance and Treasury making them on behalf of other ministries.
Reforms were implemented at SIWA and were instrumental in improving the situation at SIEA. The 
Government did not continue financing poorly performing SOEs but actively worked toward finding and 
implementing a sustainable solution. Without this intervention, infusion of financing either the 
government, IFIs, donors, and so on would not have been sufficient.
128. Technical assistance and expertise are critical components to SOE reform. SISEP provided both 
technical assistance/expertise as well as financing to SIEA. However, the technical assistance component 
played a crucial part in SISEP’s success. The component that addressed management strengthening was 
key in providing a foundation for SIEA’s success. Subsequent achievements in financial operations or 
technical improvements were dependent on having a strong and capable management structure. Building 
institutional capacity should be a required component of any financing that is provided to entities with 
low capacity as it is the only way to ensure the achievements are sustainable.
129. Targeted assistance in low capacity environments can be essential to successful project 
implementation. As noted, the project experienced delays in implementing its Procurement Plan 
notwithstanding the World Bank providing close supervision and support to procurement activities. 
Project or procurement officers with experience in implementing World Bank/donor projects would have 
been beneficial to SISEP. The lack of a project management team was remedied in the World Bank’s 
follow-on SIEAREEP where key project management positions were identified—procurement officer, gender specialist, solar engineer, manager construction, and manager projects. The project management 
team is expected to address capacity constraints. In terms of procurement, a positive impact on timely 
submission and quality of bidding documents for large works contracts is expected, thereby contributing 
to project success.
.
.ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND KEY OUTPUTS
A. RESULTS INDICATORS
A.1 PDO Indicators
Objective/Outcome: A. To improve operational efficiency of SIEA
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
System losses Percentage 27.00 16.00 18.00 17.30
31-Dec-2007 31-Dec-2011 31-Mar-2019 29-Jun-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator achieved at 104 percent. System losses as measured by technical and non-technical losses demonstrated a steady decline through the project 
implementation period. Losses had declined by 6 percentage points at the time Additional Finance was approved (from 27 percent at project start to 21 
percent in 2014), and 17.3 percent at project close. Project activities directly responded to the outcome of system loss reduction
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Average number of debtor Days 360.00 30.00 35.00 33.61days to collect billed revenue 31-Dec-2007 31-Dec-2011 31-Mar-2019 31-Mar-2019
Comments (achievements against targets):
Substantial improvement in average number of debtor days to collect billed revenue with an achievement ratio of 104 percent. Project interventions, 
especially in areas of management strengthening, are directly relevant in achievement of this outcome.
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Number of days between due 
date of customer bill, and if 
not paid, notice of arrears
Days 365.00 15.00 15.00
31-Dec-2007 31-Dec-2011 31-Mar-2019
Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator achieved with an achievement ratio of 100 percent. Customer is provided with a bill at the end of a billing period with a due date of 15 days after 
the billing period. Included in the bill is a table indicating that the bill will be in arrears (called aged debts) 30 days after the billing period, i.e., 15 days after 
the due date. When the bill is in arrears (15 days after the due date), the customer is put on the disconnection list. The bill indicates that no further notice 
is provided. Therefore, notice that the bill would be in arrears is provided at the end of the billing cycle (0 days) and the customer has been given 15 days 
between the bill due date and being in arrears.
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Quarterly financial Text N Y Ymanagement reports, and 
rolling projections for SIEA 
performance within 14 days 
after end of each quarter
31-Dec-2007 29-Jun-2018 31-Mar-2019
Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator was achieved at achievement ratio of 100 percent and can be directly attributed to project supported activities of strengthening 
management. New management instituted new procedures and company rules which had a direct bearing on the production of quarterly financial 
management reports and projections within 14 days after the end of each quarter.
Objective/Outcome: B. To improve system reliability of SIEA
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
System Average Interruption 
Duration Index (SAIDI)
Minutes 51840.00 848.70 2000.00 1757.60
31-Dec-2007 29-Jun-2018 31-Mar-2019 29-Jun-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator was achieved with an achievement ratio of 112 percent. SISEP's financing of the system reliability component directly contributed towards 
achieving this indicator.Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
System Average Interruption 
Frequency Index (SAIFI)
Minutes 816.00 150.00 85.00 17.50
31-Dec-2007 31-Dec-2011 31-Mar-2019 31-Mar-2019
Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator achieved with an achievement ratio of 179 percent. SISEP's financing of the system reliability component directly contributed towards achieving 
this indicator.
Objective/Outcome: C. To improve financial sustainability of SIEA
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Collection ratio Percentage 72.00 90.00 70.00 60.00
31-Dec-2007 31-Dec-2011 31-Mar-2019 29-Jun-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
The collection ratio indicator was deemed to contain significant methodological errors which precluded it from being a viable measure of improved 
collections and was therefore not included in the ICR's analysis. However, SIEA's net profitability, an intermediate indicator in ISRs was deemed adequate 
to substantiate the PDO and was elevated to a PDO level indicator for purposes of this ICR's assessment.Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Revenue per Kwh generated Text SB$ 1.39/KWh SB$ 3.00/KWh SB$ 4.5/KWH SB$ 4.64/KWh
30-Jun-2008 31-Dec-2011 31-Mar-2019 29-Jun-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
Indicator achieved with an achievement ratio of 103 percent. Achievement of this indicator can be directly attributed to SIEA's commercialization program 
supported by SISEP.
A.2 Intermediate Results Indicators
Component: Component 1 - Strengthening Management
Component: Component 2 - Financial Operations
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Net Profit before tax Text Loss SB$ 44M Profit SB$ 25M Profit SB$ 98M SB$ 80.1M
30-Jun-2008 31-Dec-2011 31-Dec-2018 31-Dec-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):Component: Component 3 - Technical Operations
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Commissioning of one 
12MVA transformer at 
Lungga Power Station
Text N Y N
13-Feb-2014 31-Mar-2019 15-Jan-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
Works for commissioning of the 12MVA transformer at Lungga Power Station are complete. SIEA is awaiting completion of works (not included in SISEP) 
for commissioning the plant as it would be more cost-effective on a system-wide basis.
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Commissioning of 5MVA 
33kV/11kV transformer and 
a second 33 kV switchboard 
at Ranadi
Text N Y N
13-Feb-2014 15-Jan-2018 15-Jan-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
Works for commissioning of 5MVA 33kV/11kV transformer and a second 33 kV switchboard at Ranadi are complete. SIEA is awaiting completion of works 
(not included in SISEP) for commissioning the plant as it would be more cost-effective on a system-wide basis.Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Kola'a Ridge 33/11kV 
substation commissioned 
with one 7.5MVA 
transformer
Text N Y N
13-Feb-2014 31-Mar-2019 15-Jan-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):
Works for commissioning of the 33/11kV substation at Kola'a Ridge with one 7.5MVA are complete. SIEA is awaiting completion of works (not included in 
SISEP) for commissioning as it would be more cost-effective on a system-wide basis.
Indicator Name Unit of Measure Baseline Original Target
Formally Revised 
Target
Actual Achieved at 
Completion
Feeder 12 load relocated 
from Lungga 11kV generation 
bus to East Honiara 
Substation
Text N Y Y
13-Feb-2014 31-Mar-2019 31-Dec-2018
Comments (achievements against targets):B. KEY OUTPUTS BY COMPONENT
Objective/Outcome I: To improve the operational efficiency of SIEA
Outcome Indicators
I.A System Losses
I.B Average number of debtor days to collect billed revenue
I.C Number of days between due date of tariff and if not paid notice 
of arrears
I.D Quarterly financial management reports and rolling projections of 
SIEA performance within 14 days at the end of each quarter
Intermediate Results Indicators
I.a Improved support for decision making – regular reports on key 
performance indicators used to make investment decisions
I.b Improved capacity to manage SIEA operations – regular Board 
meetings and decisions made for SIEA strategy and operations
Key Outputs by Component
(linked to the achievement of the Objective/Outcome I)
1. Key staff hired (Technical General Manager, Commercialization 
manager, Independent Board director)
2. Training provided (Finance, Engineering)
3. Studies conducted on tariff review, asset valuation, PPAs
Objective/Outcome II: To improve system reliability of SIEA
Outcome Indicators
II.A System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI)
II.B System Average Interruption Frequency Index (SAIFI)
Intermediate Results Indicators II.a Commissioning of one 12MVA transformer at Lungga Power 
StationII.b Commissioning of 5MVA 33kV/11kV transformer and a second 
33kV switchboard at Ranadi
II.c Kola’a Ridge 33/11kV substation commissioned with one 7.5MVA 
transformer
II.d Feeder 12 load relocated from Lungga 11kV generation bus to 
East Honiara Substation
Key Outputs by Component
(linked to the achievement of the Objective/Outcome II)
1. Rehabilitation of Generation infrastructure
2. Rehabilitation of transmission and distribution infrastructure
3. Support to Owner’s Engineer – supervision of distribution, 
rehabilitation, and generation upgrades
Objective/Outcome III: To improve the financial sustainability of SIEA
Outcome Indicators III.A Revenue per kWh generated
III.B SIEA profitability
Intermediate Results Indicators III.a Improved cash flow position as evidenced through unqualified 
financial audits
Key Outputs by Component
(linked to the achievement of the Objective/Outcome III)
1. Key staff hired (Technical General Manager, Commercialization 
manager, Independent Board director)
2. Training provided (Finance, Engineering)
3. Technical assistance provided for improved financial management, 
accounting, procurement processes
4. Reduction of non-technical losses, improved collections, new IT 
system installedANNEX 2. BANK LENDING AND IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT/SUPERVISION
A. TASK TEAM MEMBERS
Name Role
Preparation
Supervision/ICR
Maria Isabel A. S. Neto Task Team Leader(s)
Zhentu Liu Procurement Specialist(s)
Stephen Paul Hartung Financial Management Specialist
Jennifer Appo Team Member
Janet Funa Team Member
Renee Berthome Team Member
Kim Dagmar Baverstock Team Member
Ross James Butler Safeguards Advisor
B. STAFF TIME AND COST
Stage of Project Cycle
Staff Time and Cost
No. of staff weeks US$ (including travel and consultant costs)
Preparation
FY06 1.650 41,970.77
FY07 8.965 133,501.71
FY08 25.629 727,988.01
FY09 0 84,703.30
FY10 0 12,168.30
FY16 0 4,892.24Total 36.24 1,005,224.33
Supervision/ICR
FY09 15.481 100,033.65
FY10 8.712 46,782.75
FY11 13.176 45,198.67
FY12 17.605 55,666.62
FY13 13.977 69,339.32
FY14 18.368 87,115.05
FY15 17.009 58,555.33
FY16 22.267 93,859.50
FY17 19.165 96,021.42
FY18 7.575 75,861.32
FY19 12.371 97,049.89
FY20 5.367 39,066.50
Total 171.07 864,550.02ANNEX 3. PROJECT COST BY COMPONENT
Components Amount at Approval15
(US$M)
Actual at Project 
Closing (US$M)
Percentage of Approval 
(US$M)
Strengthening Management 4.00 3.69 92.3
Financial Operations 0.7 0.64 91.4
Technical Operations 8.0 7.37 92.1
Contingency 0 0 0
Total 12.7 11.7 92.1
 
15 Amounts at Approval indicate amounts that were approved at project approval. It includes amounts added during approval of 
additional financing and accounts for exchange rate movements and amounts that were cancelled at project restructuring.ANNEX 4. EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS
ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL ANALYSIS OF SOLOMON 
ISLANDS SUSTAINABLE ENERGY PROJECT
1. The project has achieved the key outcomes with high efficiency based on economic analysis and 
financial analysis (project level) as described herein, which is conservative and robust to 
sensitivity analysis.
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
2. The economic analysis at completion was conducted at project level considering that major 
economic benefits are the joint result of implementing all project components. In sum, at 
completion, the project has an NPV of US$7.12 million (at a 10 percent discount rate) while 
Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) stands at 24.3 percent, which indicates great Value for 
Money from the project. Taking environmental benefits into consideration, the NPV increased to 
US$13.31 million and the EIRR improved to 27.1%. A summary of the results, assumptions and 
detailed analysis is presented in following sections. 
Table A4.1. Summary of Economic Benefits and Costs (US$)
ECONOMIC BENEFITS
Avoided Fuel Cost 304,770
Reduced Outage Cost 13,063,619
ECONOMIC COSTS
Capital Investment 5,879,352
O&M 366,066
NET ECONOMIC BENEFIT 7,122,971
EIRR 24.3%
Avoided Green Gas Emission 6,182,994
NET ECONOMIC BENEFIT (incl. environmental benefits) 13,305,965
EIRR (envir. benefit adjusted) 27.1%
3. Two economic benefits considered and quantified in this ex-post economic analysis are avoided 
fuel cost and reduced outage cost. This is in line with the analytical framework established at 
project appraisal and additional financing appraisal. The first direct benefit of implementing this 
project is to reduce energy losses, which enables the delivery of same services from less fuel 
consumption. By comparing actual annual power generation to electricity sales in SIEA’s audited 
annual report, it was evident that incremental reduction of energy losses is achieved with the 
project implementation. The other key benefit is increased system reliability, in the form of 
reduced outage and in customer saving through reduced requirement for auto-generation backup systems. In this ex-post exercise, the reduced outage cost was estimated by using the actual outage data as well as annual average retail tariff figures. However, no information is available 
on the reduced back-up generation systems due to better system reliability, hence the benefit 
is unable to be quantified. In addition, there are several secondary economic benefits from the 
implementation of the project, including reduced operation and maintenance (O&M) costs, 
better voltage profile, better power harmonics, and more system stability. They are 
nevertheless less significant compared to avoided fuel cost and reduction of outage. A 
disproportional level of data collection and modeling efforts are requested to quantify these 
benefits. For these reasons, the analysis is conservative in underestimating project benefits.
4. Avoided Fuel Cost. Economic Benefit from Avoided Fuel Cost is only US$0.3 million compared to 
projected US$9.0 million at appraisal. Two main reasons:
• Much lower-than-expected crude oil price after 2008 financial crisis leads to less saving 
in fuel cost.
• More importantly, our best educated estimation of non-technical losses is much higher 
than the baseline in the original economic analysis. Among total system losses, it was 
widely accepted that reduction of non-technical loss cannot be counted as economic 
benefit because they are mainly transfer of benefits between entities within an 
economy. And reduction of technical losses is the only source of avoided fuel cost in this 
project. However, as pointed out by Sinclair Knight Merz in its “Solomon Islands 
Electricity Authority - Loss Reduction Study for the Honiara Network (2011)”, in practice 
it is difficult to determine the balance between the technical and non-technical losses 
without precise measurement. Therefore, the key to calculate benefit here is to best 
estimate: 1) actual technical losses during the period of project implementation, and 2) 
the baseline of technical losses at the start of the project. Unfortunately, neither piece 
of information was clear.
• The alternative approach is to determine 1) actual non-technical losses during the 
period of project implementation, and 2) the baseline of non-technical losses at the start 
of the project. Then the difference between total losses and non-technical losses is the 
technical losses.
• Actual non-technical losses during the period of project implementation was able to be 
estimated based on datapoints provided in SIEA’s report.
• However, there were three different sources on baseline of non-technical losses at the 
start of the project. As shown in the scenario analysis below, economic NPV of avoided 
fuel cost is very sensitive to the baseline of non-technical losses at the start of the 
project. And it was clear that, if 6% as implied at appraisal is used, the NPV becomes 
significantly larger.
Table A4.2. NPV Scenario Analysis: Avoided Fuel Cost to Non-Technical Loss Baseline• After careful examination, 12% was selected as the best-estimated non-technical loss 
rate baseline in 2010 because all other options are not sensible. As per SIEA’s annual 
report, the non-technical loss rate in 2012 is 12%, it’s reasonable to argue that the nontechnical loss rates in 2011 and 2010 are unlikely lower than 12%. Also, if 15% was 
adopted, it would leave the technical loss baseline at 6.92%, which is not practical 
considering the average technical loss during project implementation (2010-2018) is at 
a much higher level of 10.42%.
• In conclusion, with a baseline non-technical loss of 12%, NPV of avoided fuel cost was 
US$0.30 million.
5. Reduced Outage Cost. The estimated economic benefit from reduced outage cost is also lower 
than expected. It’s worth pointing out that annual retail tariff (customer’s willingness to pay, 
“WTP” hereinafter) is used to gauge the cost of outage since there is no known estimate of 
outage costs available for the Solomon Islands. Average annual retail tariff is US$0.76/kwh, 
which is lower than the assumption of US$1/kwh in the additional financing appraisal document. 
This can largely explain why estimated economic benefit of US$13.06 million from reduced 
outage cost is lower than the projected benefit of US$20.06 million at additional financing 
appraisal. In addition, during project implementation, SIEA installed several generators using its 
own capital and findings from ADB and other sources. However, it’s hardly possible to 
distinguish what percentage of reduced outage results from our project or generator addition.
Also, one important reason that SIEA was able to deploy its own funds and attract new external 
funding in growing its generation capacity is the implementation of this project, which put SIEA 
in sound financial footing and better operational efficiency.
Table A4.3. Customer’s Willingness to Pay (WTP) Estimate
 304,770 
Implied At Apraisal 6.0% 8,324,863.14 
SIEA management estimate - Lower Range 10.0% 2,978,134.62 
SIEA management estimate -Higher Range 12.0% 304,770.37 
SKM estimate 15.0% (3,705,276.02)
Economic NPV Scenario Analysis: Feul Saving to Non-Technical Loss Baseline
Non-Technical Loss Rate Baseline in 20106. Data is based on actual IDA grant and credit disbursement as well as operating data reported by 
SIEA from 2010 to 2018. Key assumptions are listed below. 
• Total capital investment was US$11.72 million, 68.94% of planned original and additional 
financing. 
• 10% discount rate.
• Operation and maintenance (O&M) costs are estimated at 1% of investment costs considering 
improvement of efficiency after project implementation.
• Load factor at 62%.
• Grid emission factor for the Solomon Islands is 0.31 tCO2 per KWh per UNDP data.16
• Price for Carbon at 30 USD/tCO2.
7. Base case results.
• As detailed in the table below, SIEA experienced substantial growth of both power generation 
and sales. Thanks to the reduction of system losses, SIEA achieved high sales growth (19%) 
with lower generation growth (14%).
 
16https://www.undp.org/content/dam/philippines/docs/Operations/UNDP%20Environmental%20Performance%20Reporting%
20toolPhilippine%20CO.xlsx?download
WTP Estimate US$/Kwh
2009 -
2010 0.515
2011 0.675
2012 0.807
2013 0.870
2014 0.927
2015 0.894
2016 0.786
2017 0.786
2018 0.747
2019 0.720
2020 0.703
2021 0.710
2022 0.717
2023 0.724Table A4.4 System Generation, Losses, and Sales Comparison
• As discussed at project appraisal, the main economic benefit to be quantified isthe fuel saving 
from reduction of system technical losses and increased reliability from reduction of outage. 
Below is a detailed table to shown economic benefits and costs year by year.
Table A4.5. Project Net Economic Benefit Evaluation
Total Total
Generation Sales Generation Sales
kWh kWh % kWh kWh kWh % kWh
2008 2008
2009 2009 78,152,447 n.a.
2010 83,623,118 20,063,519 23.99% 63,559,599 2010 83,623,118 20,063,519.0 23.99% 63,559,599
2011 83,867,254 20,122,094 23.99% 63,745,160 2011 83,752,049 20,006,889.0 23.89% 63,745,160
2012 83,558,695 20,048,062 23.99% 63,510,633 2012 84,565,616 21,054,983.2 24.90% 63,510,633
2013 82,267,333 19,738,228 23.99% 62,529,105 2013 81,101,391 18,572,286.0 22.90% 62,529,105
2014 86,620,779 20,782,742 23.99% 65,838,038 2014 84,911,433 19,073,395.3 22.46% 65,838,038
2015 88,283,458 21,181,664 23.99% 67,101,793 2015 86,840,961 19,739,167.6 22.73% 67,101,793
2016 93,634,068 22,465,425 23.99% 71,168,643 2016 92,687,032 21,518,390.0 23.22% 71,168,643
2017 97,751,965 23,453,424 23.99% 74,298,541 2017 94,282,936 19,984,395.0 21.20% 74,298,541
2018 99,617,534 23,901,026 23.99% 75,716,508 2018 94,979,593 19,263,084.9 20.28% 75,716,508
2019 105,257,578 25,254,229 23.99% 80,003,348 2019 99,176,436 19,173,087.9 19.33% 80,003,348
2020 111,872,781 26,841,401 23.99% 85,031,380 2020 104,170,008 19,138,628.5 18.37% 85,031,380
2021 118,867,113 28,519,537 23.99% 90,347,577 2021 109,398,442 19,050,865.3 17.41% 90,347,577
2022 122,723,551 29,444,804 23.99% 93,278,747 2022 111,686,028 18,407,280.5 16.48% 93,278,747
2023 126,089,325 30,252,347 23.99% 95,836,978 2023 113,457,655 17,620,676.8 15.53% 95,836,978
WITHOUT PROJECT WITH PROJECT
Year
Year System Losses
(incl. auxiliary use)
System Losses
(incl. auxiliary use)
Net
Fuel Total Capital Non-Fuel Total Economic
Year Generation Consumption WTP Savings Benefit Investment O&M Cost Benfit
KWh KWh US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)
2009 - - - - - 165,429 1,654 167,083 (167,083)
2010 - - - - - 992,093 11,575 1,003,668 (1,003,668)
2011 (677,377) - - 232,670 232,670 764,002 19,215 783,217 (550,547)
2012 369,290 - - (132,186) (132,186) 543,934 24,655 568,588 (700,774)
2013 (1,104,409) (11,114,013) (9,674,206) 386,725 (9,287,481) 1,229,067 36,945 1,266,012 (10,553,493)
2014 (132,847) 4,644,712 4,307,657 45,227 4,352,884 (57,539) 36,370 (21,170) 4,374,053
2015 1,119,844 7,099,887 6,344,283 (249,319) 6,094,964 220,323 38,573 258,896 5,836,068
2016 2,312,335 3,749,470 2,948,506 (420,963) 2,527,543 762,836 46,201 809,037 1,718,505
2017 1,217,917 7,817,071 6,144,952 (221,641) 5,923,312 2,065,368 66,855 2,132,223 3,791,088
2018 1,283,483 7,059,596 5,274,538 (315,859) 4,958,679 3,482,464 101,680 3,584,144 1,374,536
2019 362,568 7,059,596 5,080,146 (82,604) 4,997,542 1,556,003 117,240 1,673,243 3,324,299
2020 (649,393) 7,059,596 4,960,296 143,477 5,103,773 117,240 117,240 4,986,534
2021 (1,762,897) 7,059,596 5,010,852 377,770 5,388,622 117,240 117,240 5,271,383
2022 (2,872,801) 7,059,596 5,059,408 614,209 5,673,617 117,240 117,240 5,556,377
2023 (4,028,822) 7,059,596 5,110,479 863,679 5,974,158 117,240 117,240 5,856,918
2024 (5,174,304) 1,114,396 1,114,396 117,240 117,240 997,156
 NPV @
10% 13,063,619 304,770 13,368,389 5,879,352 366,066 6,245,418 7,122,971
 Economic Rate of Return 24.3%
INCREMENTAL ECONOMIC BENEFITS ECONOMIC COSTS8. Base Case with Environmental Benefit. Below is the breakdown of costs and benefits with 
environmental benefits.Table A4.6. Project Net Economic Benefit Evaluation (Including Environmental Benefit)
9. Base case comparison. It’s very important to point out that the economic analysis at appraisal 
only quantified the net economic benefit from avoided fuel cost while the economic analysis at 
additional financing appraisal only focused on reduced outage cost. Therefore, in order to 
compare ex-ante and ex-post net economic analysis, the two ex-ante analyses need to be 
harmonized and consolidated. Harmonized total ex-ante NPV is roughly estimated at US$18.07
million. In comparison, ex-post NPV is lower at US$7.12 million. Two driving factors are the 
lower-than-expected oil price and reduction of capital investment from US$17.00 million to 
US$11.72 million. Harmonized ex-ante ERR has not been calculated due to methodological 
constraints and lack of sufficient supporting data. However, the EIRR calculated at completion 
nevertheless demonstrates comparable economic viability of the project broadly consistent 
with expectations at appraisal and at the stage of additional financing.
Table A4.7. Comparison of NPV and EIRR
Appraisal AF Appraisal Harmonized 
Ex-ante Total
ICR
Excluding environmental benefits
EIRR (%) 34.80% 17.60% n/a 24.30%
NPV at 10% DR (US$M) 5.61 20.06 18.07 7.12
Including environmental benefits
EIRR (%) 27.10%
NPV at 10% DR (US$M) 13.31
10. Sensitivity analysis.
Net
Fuel Environmental Total Capital Non-Fuel Total Economic
Generation Consumption WTP Savings Benefits Benefit Investment O&M Cost Benfit
KWh KWh US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
2009 - - - - - - 165,429 1,654 167,083 (167,083)
2010 - - - - - - 992,093 11,575 1,003,668 (1,003,668)
2011 (677,377) - - 232,670 6,306,092 6,538,762 764,002 19,215 783,217 5,755,545
2012 369,290 - - (132,186) (3,437,929) (3,570,115) 543,934 24,655 568,588 (4,138,703)
2013 (1,104,409) (11,114,013) (9,674,206) 386,725 10,281,571 994,090 1,229,067 36,945 1,266,012 (271,922)
2014 (132,847) 4,644,712 4,307,657 45,227 1,236,749 5,589,632 (57,539) 36,370 (21,170) 5,610,802
2015 1,119,844 7,099,887 6,344,283 (249,319) (10,425,267) (4,330,303) 220,323 38,573 258,896 (4,589,199)
2016 2,312,335 3,749,470 2,948,506 (420,963) (21,526,841) (18,999,299) 762,836 46,201 809,037 (19,808,336)
2017 1,217,917 7,817,071 6,144,952 (221,641) (11,338,280) (5,414,969) 2,065,368 66,855 2,132,223 (7,547,192)
2018 1,283,483 7,059,596 5,274,538 (315,859) (11,948,677) (6,989,997) 3,482,464 101,680 3,584,144 (10,574,141)
2019 362,568 7,059,596 5,080,146 (82,604) (3,375,352) 1,622,190 1,556,003 117,240 1,673,243 (51,053)
2020 (649,393) 7,059,596 4,960,296 143,477 6,045,566 11,149,340 117,240 117,240 11,032,100
2021 (1,762,897) 7,059,596 5,010,852 377,770 16,411,812 21,800,434 117,240 117,240 21,683,194
2022 (2,872,801) 7,059,596 5,059,408 614,209 26,744,543 32,418,160 117,240 117,240 32,300,920
2023 (4,028,822) 7,059,596 5,110,479 863,679 37,506,601 43,480,759 117,240 117,240 43,363,519
2024 (5,174,304) 1,114,396 1,114,396 1,030,064 1,030,064 84,331
 NPV @
10% 13,063,619 304,770 6,182,994 19,551,383 5,879,352 366,066 6,245,418 13,305,965
 Economic Rate of Return 27.1%
Year
INCREMENTAL ECONOMIC BENEFITS ECONOMIC COSTS• A sensitivity analysis has been performed on annual project O&M cost, in order to evaluate 
the impact of variation in O&M on economic viability of the project. The results are presented 
in the table below and it shows that the economic rate of return of the project is resilient to 
future changes in the generation facilities.
Table A4.8. Sensitivity Analysis
Scenario NPV (US$M) EIRR (%)
O&M Costs (as percent of capital cost)
Base case 1% 7.12 24.3%
200% of base case 2% 6.76 23.6%
300% of base case 3% 6.39 22.9%
• Another sensitivity analysis has been performed on the discount rate. 10% was used according 
to the old guidance note on “Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic Analysis of World 
Bank Projects”. However, according to the new guidance note (2016), a discount rate of 2 
times the GDP growth rate is recommended. Therefore, the GDP growth rate of the Solomon 
Islands in 2018 and geometric mean of the past 10 years are used as the other cases. It also 
indicates that the economic rate of return of the project is resilient to the discount rate used.
Table A4.9. Sensitivity Analysis
Scenario NPV (US$M)
Discount Rate
2*GDP Growth Rate 2018 6.78% 11.38
2*GDP Growth Rate (Geo-mean 2009-2018) 7.43% 10.37
DR used originally 10.00% 7.12
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS
11. An ex-post financial analysis of the project (not the Solomon Power as an enterprise or a sector) 
was also carried out using the same method of evaluation “cost-benefit analysis” with the same 
discount rate of 10%. In sum, at completion, the project has a Financial NPV of US$5.63 million 
while Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) stands at 21.8 percent, which far exceeds the 
estimated project Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) of 3.6%. A summary of the results, 
assumptions and detailed analysis is presented in the following sections. 
Table A4.10. Summary of Financial Benefits and Costs (US$)
FINANCIAL BENEFITS
Incremental revenue from reduction of loss 6,793,190 
Incremental revenue from reduction of outage 12,520,779 
FINANCIAL COSTS
Capital Investment 9,991,496 Incremental Fuel & Oil Consumption 3,072,026 
O&M 622,100 
NET FINANCIAL BENEFIT 5,628,347 
FIRR 21.8%
12. The main financial benefits considered in this analysis are tariff revenue from incremental power 
consumptions by the customers due to reduction of energy losses and reduction of outage, which 
is in line with the two economic benefits examined in economic analysis. However, it’s important 
to point out that financial benefit from reduction of non-technical losses is included here since it’s 
the transfer payment from the customers to SIEA.
13. On the other hand, three main financial costs contributed to achieve the above-mentioned 
financial benefits: total project capital investment, fuel and oil cost for the incremental power 
consumption, and the extra O&M cost. Here the capital investment included the IDA grant, IDA 
credit, and the US$8.20 million equity invested by SIEA. Since the year-by-year breakdown of SIEA 
equity invested to different components of the project is not available, it was proportionally 
pegged to the actual disbursement by the World Bank. In addition, only incremental revenue from 
reduction of outage will result in incremental fuel & oil consumption.
14. Key assumptions are listed below. 
• Total World Bank capital investment was US$11.72 million, 68.94% of planned original and 
additional financing. 
• 10% discount rate.
• Operation and maintenance costs are estimated at 1% of investment costs considering 
improvement of efficiency after project implementation.
• Load factor at 62%.
• 0% corporate income tax per Electricity Act 1969.
15. Below please find the year-by-year breakdown of the financial analysis.Table A4.11. Detailed Financial Benefits and Costs
16. Base case comparison. It’s clear that the project generated a positive FNPV of US$5.63 million, 
which indicates that the project is financially viable. Also, FIRR far exceeds the WACC of 3.6%. 
17. In order to calculate WACC, the cost of IDA grant, credit and SIEA equity are all needed. 
However, cost of equity of SIEA is not available nor disclosed in SIEA’s annual report. There are 
several ways to estimate such cost of equity. Since SIEA is a 100% SOE of SIG, 6.5%17 interest 
rate of the $150 million Domestic Development Bonds issued by SIG to the Solomon Islands 
National Provident Fund Board (SINPFB) in 2017 could be used as a benchmark, resulting in a 
WACC of 3.6%. On the other hand, if we use the SIG long-term government bond yield of 
3.24%18, the WACC will further decrease to 2.3%. In either case, FIRR is far larger than the WACC, 
which made the project financially viable and attractive. Detailed calculation of WACC is 
illustrated in Table A4.11.
Table A4.11. SISEP - Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC)
 
17 https://www.solomontimes.com/news/sig-sinpf-sign-domestic-development-bonds-agreement/8711
18 https://www.economy.com/solomon-islands/average-long-term-government-bond
Net
Year Total Capital Incremental Non-Fuel Total Financial
Benefit Investment Fuel&Oil O&M Cost Benfit
KWh KWh US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$ US$
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10)
2009 - - - - - 281,134 - 2,811 283,945 (283,945)
2010 - - - - - 1,685,983 - 19,671 1,705,654 (1,705,654)
2011 784,834 - 530,072 - 530,072 1,298,361 - 32,655 1,331,015 (800,943)
2012 (443,692) - (358,217) - (358,217) 924,372 - 41,898 966,271 (1,324,488)
2013 2,640,224 (11,619,937) 2,298,186 (10,114,588) (7,816,402) 2,088,702 (3,998,492) 62,786 (1,847,004) (5,969,398)
2014 1,626,512 4,486,594 1,508,480 4,161,013 5,669,493 (97,784) 1,499,995 61,808 1,464,019 4,205,474
2015 847,908 6,939,924 757,670 6,201,344 6,959,014 374,421 1,562,977 65,552 2,002,950 4,956,064
2016 (411,889) 3,496,193 (323,901) 2,749,334 2,425,433 1,296,380 630,630 78,516 2,005,525 419,908
2017 1,299,818 8,097,635 1,021,779 6,365,502 7,387,281 3,509,931 1,472,008 113,615 5,095,554 2,291,728
2018 2,036,450 6,664,223 1,521,522 4,979,138 6,500,660 5,918,173 1,669,814 172,797 7,760,784 (1,260,124)
2019 2,280,349 7,059,596 1,640,959 5,080,146 6,721,105 2,644,304 1,669,222 199,240 4,512,766 2,208,339
2020 2,488,333 7,059,596 1,748,382 4,960,296 6,708,678 1,618,605 199,240 1,817,845 4,890,833
2021 2,758,330 7,059,596 1,957,844 5,010,852 6,968,696 1,569,761 199,240 1,769,001 5,199,695
2022 3,475,872 7,059,596 2,491,057 5,059,408 7,550,465 1,566,054 199,240 1,765,294 5,785,171
2023 4,317,098 7,059,596 3,125,170 5,110,479 8,235,649 1,570,120 199,240 1,769,360 6,466,289
 - 199,240 199,240 (199,240)
 FNPV @
10% 6,793,190 12,520,779 19,313,969 9,991,496 3,072,026 622,100 13,685,622 5,628,347
Financial Rate of Return 21.8%
INCREMENTAL 
CUSTOMER 
CONSUMPTION 
 FINANCIAL BENEFITS FINANCIAL COSTS
Energy 
Loss 
Reduction
Outage 
Reduction
Energy 
Loss 
Reduction
Outage 
Reduction18. Sensitivity analysis.
• A sensitivity analysis has been performed on annual project O&M cost, in order to evaluate
the impact of variation in O&M on financial viability of the project. The results are presented
in the table below and it shows that the financial rate of return of the project is resilient to
future changes in the O&M cost.
Table A4.12. Sensitivity Analysis against O&M Cost
Scenario NPV (US$) FIRR (%)
O&M Costs (as percent of capital cost)
Base case 1.00% 5,628,346.58 21.8%
200% of base case 2.00% 5,006,246.21 20.5%
300% of base case 3.00% 4,384,145.83 19.3%
• Another sensitivity analysis has been performed on the discount rate. 10% was used according
to the old guidance note on “Discounting Costs and Benefits in Economic Analysis of World
Bank Projects”. However, according to the new guidance note (2016), a discount rate of 2
times the GDP growth rate is recommended. Therefore, the GDP growth rate of the Solomon
Islands in 2018 and geometric mean of the past 10 years are used as the other cases. It also
indicates that the financial rate of return of the project is resilient to the discount rate used.
Table A4.9. Sensitivity Analysis against Discount Rate
Scenario NPV (US$)
Discount Rate
2*GDP Growth Rate 2018 6.78% 9,335,677.98 
2*GDP Growth Rate (Geo-mean 2009-2018) 7.43% 8,451,320.15 
DR used originally 10.00% 5,628,346.58 
Grant Credit SIEA Equity Total
A. Amount (USD million) 5.8 5.9 8.2 19.9
B. Weighting (%) 29% 30% 41% 100%
C. Nominal Cost (%) 0.0% 3.2% 6.5%
D. Tax rate 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
E. Tax-adjusted nominal cost [C*(1-D)] 0.0% 3.2% 6.5%
F. Inflation Rate (%) 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
G. Real Cost [(1+E)/(1+F)-1)] 0.0% 3.2% 6.5%
H. Weighted component of WACC 0.0% 0.9% 2.7%
Weighted Average Cost fo Capital (Real) 3.6%Financial Sustainability Analysis of Solomon Islands 
Electricity Authority (SIEA)
Financial Performance and Sustainability
1. SIEA financial performance has considerably improved since 2006, becoming profitable in 2011. The
SIEA incurred losses of SBD13 million and SBD37 million, in 2006 and 2007 respectively. In April 2008
when losses were SBD17 million, the Government agreed to a debt restructuring scheme through
which approximately SBD200 million owed by the SIEA to the Government was written off. In return,
the SIEA wrote off SBD32 million owed to SIEA by other government entities in 2009. This was the
main contributor to the loss of SBD9 million that year. In 2010, losses were SBD70 million because the
escalation of the outstanding receivables from government entities, mainly Solomon Islands Water
Authority (SIWA), resulted in SIEA making a provision for bad debts of SBD57 million. In May 2012, a
debt settlement agreement was signed between the two parties for SIEA to convert SBD7.5 million of
outstanding dues into a loan to be repaid by SIWA over a period of eight years commencing 1 January
2013 at an interest rate of 0%. SIEA turned profitable in 2011 with a reported profit of SBD53 million.
At the same time, the Solomon Islands Government (SIG) committed to reform and restructure SIWA,
to place it on more commercial footing, and allow its water prices to be adjusted for changes in the
electricity prices. This reform of SIWA, strongly supported by the SIG, the new SIWA Board and
Management team – with financial support from Australia and Japan, is what was missing when the
2008 debt restructure was implemented. The reforms to SIWA have been crucial to the improved
performance of SIEA since SIWA is SIEAs largest single customer. This was a condition precedent for
the IDA Grant that established SISEP (P100311). This debt restructure followed years of payment
difficulties between SOEs in the Solomon Islands, with several SOEs, particularly SIWA, owing
considerable debts to SIEA. In 2012, the SIEA had an operating income of SBD414 million, net profit
of SBD68 million, and had an asset base of SBD516 million.
2. By 2018, the SIEA had an operating income of SBD469 million, net profit of SBD80.1 million, and had
an asset base of SBD1292 million.
3. The projected financial performance of the SIEA following the implementation of the SISEP (detailed
in Table 1) shows that the project has a positive impact on SIEA’s performance. Throughout the life of
the project and beyond, total revenues, operating income and net profit are projected to increase.
Liquidity remains high with a current ratio well above 1 (lowest point is 8.5 in 2019). The debt to equity
ratio never approaches 30:70, given the SIEA’s aversion to debt, peaking at just 18:82 in 2018, before
falling over the remainder of the project. The profitability of the SIEA is projected to increase gradually
over the life of the project, with net profit margins increasing from 17% in 2013 to 44.9% in 2033 and
an average annual net profit of 37.0% over 20 years.
Conclusion 
4. This analysis concludes that the SIEA is more than capable of servicing its current level of debt, which
comprises just the US$6.0 million IDA Credit. Furthermore, the profitability of the SIEA is projected to
increase significantly over the life of the program.5. Based on the current financial projections, it appears that there is scope for SIEA to take on additional 
debt to finance its current capital expenditure program, including SISEP and other priority projects 
(the construction of a new powerhouse at Lungga Power Station and installation of four 2.5 MW diesel 
generators) worthy SBD350.0 million (US$47.6 million). There also appears to be scope for the SIEA 
to further extend the size of its capital expenditure program, and further expand access to electricity 
services across the Solomon Islands.
6. It is understood that a further tariff review is planned, which will take into account future investment 
requirements to increase access to electricity, improve reliability and quality of supply, and reduce 
operating costs by increasing the use of renewables in the power generation (i.e., solar, hydro) and 
reduce the heavy reliance on diesel-fired generation. That review should ensure the tariff 
methodology is set to more affordable levels over time. 
Table 1 – Projected financial performance of the SIEA, including CAPEX projects to be funded through ID
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2053
A Average Retail Tariff
Residential (SBD per unit) - 5.7 6.4 6.8 6.6 6.2 6.3 6.2 5.6 5.6 5.7 5.7 6.4 6.9 7.4 8.0 8.6 9.0
Industrial (SBD per unit) - 6.2 6.4 6.8 6.6 6.2 6.3 6.2 5.6 5.6 5.7 5.7 6.4 6.9 7.4 8.0 8.6 9.0
Commercial (SBD per unit) - 6.0 6.4 6.8 6.6 6.2 6.3 6.2 5.6 5.6 5.7 5.7 6.4 6.9 7.4 8.0 8.6 9.0
B Income Statements
Net Revenue 550,598 418,943 484,987 463,955 532,547 535,818 440,979 469,038 476,588 512,220 550,988 592,517 829,489 978,690 1,154,798 1,362,669 1,608,040 1,776,031 Operating Expenses 326,683 350,339 379,815 370,829 341,502 330,655 363,364 389,090 404,639 411,963 420,613 428,700 475,146 509,222 536,300 595,739 658,391 700,792
Interest Expense - - - 1,097 - - 389 30 373 381 388 396 1,761 1,394 1,027 660 293 73 Other Expenses 14 903 (5,236) 614 1,057 4,416 (424) (162) - - - - - - - - - -
Net Profit 223,901 67,701 110,408 91,415 189,988 200,747 77,649 80,080 71,576 99,877 129,986 163,420 352,582 468,075 617,471 766,270 949,356 1,075,165
C Balance Sheets
Assets
Current Assets 97,320 191,136 212,612 254,520 279,051 361,406 341,445 401,498 511,041 661,576 843,914 1,060,788 3,659,130 5,918,589 8,772,940 12,351,479 16,797,374 19,953,611
Non-Current Assets 328,611 294,230 356,444 475,068 849,436 1,102,258 1,348,704 1,825,837 1,815,444 1,841,670 1,865,370 1,889,120 2,067,007 2,195,878 2,331,448 2,489,088 2,607,838 2,679,088
Total Assets 425,931 485,366 569,057 729,588 1,128,486 1,463,664 1,690,148 2,227,335 2,326,485 2,503,246 2,709,284 2,949,908 5,726,137 8,114,467 11,104,388 14,840,567 19,405,212 22,632,698
 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
Liabilities and Equity
Liabilities 11,004 26,155 52,933 105,665 113,369 157,168 141,145 202,745 110,668 112,788 115,126 117,402 112,541 108,417 103,256 102,887 102,994 103,770
Equity 414,928 489,890 571,168 662,584 769,271 970,334 1,043,983 1,139,069 1,210,646 1,310,913 1,440,899 1,604,319 3,877,260 5,953,937 8,746,838 12,269,435 16,641,974 19,738,486
Total Liabilities and Equity 425,931 516,045 624,101 768,249 882,640 1,127,503 1,185,128 1,341,814 1,321,313 1,423,701 1,556,025 1,721,721 3,989,801 6,062,353 8,850,094 12,372,322 16,744,968 19,842,256
D Cash Flow Statements
Cash flows from:
Operating Activities 14,048 92,759 92,760 134,592 172,609 164,941 100,410 151,973 146,740 170,832 202,622 236,801 415,208 518,659 647,929 801,682 986,915 1,115,651
Investing Activities (7,496) (12,395) (72,252) (192,249) (101,391) (150,379) (85,561) (107,518) (24,436) (24,990) (25,388) (25,396) (28,595) (28,228) (27,861) (27,494) (27,128) (26,907)
Net Cash Flow 12,907 19,459 99,823 129,368 75,411 150,836 201,187 221,808 303,524 425,829 571,671 748,904 3,140,832 5,276,824 7,978,347 11,375,393 15,603,375 18,608,534
Cash Balance 19,459 99,823 129,368 75,411 150,836 201,187 221,808 303,524 425,829 571,671 748,904 960,309 3,527,445 5,767,256 8,598,416 12,149,581 16,563,163 19,697,278
E Key Financial Indicators
Net Profit Margin (%) 59% 16% 26% 20% 42% 45% 18% 17% 15% 19% 24% 28% 43% 48% 53% 56% 59% 61%
Return on Equity (%) 54% 14% 19% 14% 25% 21% 7% 7% 6% 8% 9% 10% 9% 8% 7% 6% 6% 5%
Current Ratio 9.2 7.3 7.9 9.0 7.7 6.8 8.2 7.0 8.5 10.8 13.5 16.7 52.0 78.5 110.5 140.0 172.3 192.3
F Covenant Compliance
Debt Service Coverage Ratio N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 190.9 261.4 333.7 411.3 97.6 144.6 215.5 306.9 446.1 563.6
Debt to Equity Ratio 3% 5% 9% 16% 15% 16% 14% 18% 9% 9% 8% 7% 3% 2% 1% 1% 1% 1%
G DMAC Assessment Requirements
Rate of Return on Net Fixed Assets in Service 109.3 134.3 121.4 94.6 55.4 39.9 31.2 25.4 26.2 27.6 29.3 31.1 40.0 44.4 49.3 54.5 61.4 66.0 Operating Ratio 87.0 24.0 27.8 17.8 18.4 18.7 31.0 15.0 13.1 11.4 9.8 8.5 5.5 4.9 4.3 3.8 3.4 3.2
Self-financing Ratio N/A N/A N/A 1.33 1.15 1.93 0.93 6.22 5.87 6.73 7.98 9.32 14.56 18.42 23.32 29.24 36.48 N/A Quick Ratio 8.2 7.0 7.6 8.7 7.4 6.5 7.7 6.6 8.2 10.5 13.2 16.4 51.7 78.2 110.2 139.8 172.1 192.1
Audited ProjectedANNEX 5. BORROWER, CO-FINANCIER AND OTHER PARTNER/STAKEHOLDER COMMENTS
SOLOMON ISLANDS ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY (trading as Solomon Power)
SOLOMON ISLANDS SUSTAINABLE ENERGY PROJECT
IMPLEMENTATION COMPLETION REPORT
Prepared by: Pradip Verma, Chief Executive OfficerTable of Contents
1. OVERVIEW.................................................................................................................... 71
2. PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS .............................................................................................. 71
2.1 SIEA (Implementing Agency): .........................................................................................71
2.2 SIG (Recipient)...............................................................................................................71
3. AGREEMENTS ............................................................................................................... 72
4. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE AND KEY INDICATORS ........................................... 72
5. ORIGINAL GRANT.......................................................................................................... 72
6. ADDITIONAL GRANT AND CREDIT FUNDS ...................................................................... 73
Component 1 ...........................................................................................................................74
Component 3 ...........................................................................................................................74
7. ASSESSMENT OF OUTCOMES: ....................................................................................... 74
7.1 Background ..................................................................................................................74
7.2 Transitioning of SIEA......................................................................................................74
7.2.1 Governance: ....................................................................................................................74
7.2.2 Management ...................................................................................................................75
7.2.3 Financial/External Financial Annual Audits .......................................................................76
7.2.4 Training ...........................................................................................................................76
7.2.5 Capital Infrastructure Development..................................................................................77
7.2.6 Reduction of losses..........................................................................................................83
7.2.7 Debtors............................................................................................................................84
8. SIEA TODAY .................................................................................................................. 84
9. KEY FACTORS AFFECTING IMPLEMENTATION AND OUTCOMES: .................................... 85
10. LEARNINGS AND PROPOSED ACTIONS TO IMPROVE...................................................... 86
11. SUSTAINABILITY ........................................................................................................... 87
12. CANCELLATION AND REALLOCATION OF FUNDS ............................................................ 88
APPENDIX 1......................................................................................................................... 88
APPENDIX 2......................................................................................................................... 901. Overview
SIEA was in financial crisis and close to insolvency with severe cash-flow problems in 2007-2009 due to 
the “tension”, large outstanding receivables, non-revenue losses, rising oil prices, large debt levels, and a 
depreciating Solomon Islands Dollar (SBD). In 2009 the Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy Project (SISEPP100311) commenced with support provided by the World Bank with the project development objective 
to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial sustainability of SIEA.
The total project cost was US$19.4 million (US$ 6.4 million- SIEA funding; US$13.0 million IDA grant and 
credits). The original IDA (US$4.0 million) became effective June 2009. Additional IDA Grant and Credit funds 
(US$ 13.0 million) became effective 26 June 2014. The Project Closed on 31 March 2019.
Together with support provided through SISEP, SIEA’s financial performance has improved dramatically 
from making losses until 2010 to a net profit of SBD68 million, SBD110m, SBD91m, SBD107, SBD120m, 
SBD80m and SBD80m respectively in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 respectively. Electricity 
sales revenues increased from SBD351.5 million in 2011 to SBD455 million in 2018. Additionally, the 
reliability indices SAIDI, SAIFI in Honiara have both shown significant improvement. Furthermore, the nontechnical losses have shown a steady reduction from 16% in 2009 to 6% in 2018. 
SIEA is well placed to invest significantly in capital projects. The organisation has successfully delivered 
capital projects over the financial years 2013-2018. SIEA has a strong cash position and is now planning a 
capital investment program of SBD1 billion in total over the period 2019-2022.
2. Project Stakeholders
The stakeholders are Solomon Islands Government (the recipient), Solomon Islands Electricity Authority (the 
implementing agency) and The International Development Association (IDA).
Broadly, the roles of the stakeholders were as follows:
2.1. SIEA (Implementing Agency):
SIEA was responsible for implementing the project including: (i) Carrying out, with the assistance 
of adequately qualified consultants, the technical aspects of the Project (ii) carrying out fiduciary 
aspects (procurement, financial management, disbursement and audit functions) of the Project 
(iii) preparing, and submitting to the Association, quarterly and annual progress reports; and (iv)
carrying out monitoring and evaluation functions under the Project.
SIEA was also responsible to ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the 
provisions of the Anti-Corruption Guidelines.
2.2. SIG (Recipient)
To facilitate the carrying out of the Project the Recipient has made available the proceeds of the 
grant and credit/loan funds to the Implementation entity under subsidiary agreements between 
the Recipient and the Implementing Agency.
The Recipient also provided oversight of the Project by monitoring and evaluating the progress
of the project. The Recipient also ensured that the Project implementation agency maintained a Financial 
Management system in accordance with provisions of the General Conditions in the Project 
Agreement.
Additionally, the Recipient ensured that the Project Implementation Entity’s financial statements 
are audited in accordance with the General Conditions of the Project Agreement and also 
ensured that the audited statements are forwarded to the Association within the stipulated 
period as per the general conditions of the Project Agreement. 
3. Agreements
The Project Agreement between IDA and SIG
The Subsidiary agreements between IDA and SIEA
4. Project Development Objective and key indicators
The development objective is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial
sustainability of SIEA through improved financial and operational management, reduction of losses,
improved generator and distribution system reliability and improved revenue collection.
Key indicators against which project progress has been monitored (see appendix 1 and 2 for details)
include:
Reduction in the frequency and duration of outages
Increases in the collection of electricity bills
Improvement of SIEA’s retained revenue for each generated kWh; and
An upturn in SIEA’s profitability
5. Original grant
The funding under this grant was utilised to improve the governance, strengthen management
capacity at the highest level, improve reliability of power supply, reduce losses and improve
generation efficiency. The original grant commenced on 26th June 2009 and it closed on 30th June
2017 with a total disbursement of US$3.83 million.
Under the original grant, SISEP supported the funding of the following roles in SIEA:
External Director (David Laurie from April 2010 to September 2016)
General Manager (Norman Nichols from March 2010 to November 2014). His remuneration 
was paid under SISEP only up to November 2013.
Commercialisation Manager (Richard Scott from July 2009 to February 2011)
Chief Financial Officer (Mike Payne from February 2011 to November 2012)Chief Financial Officer (Phill O’Reilly from March 2013 to July 2016). His remuneration was paid 
under SISEP only up to November 2013.
General Manager Capital Works (Mark Greenaway from December 2014 to July 2017)
General Manager Capital Works (Hemant Kumar from November 2017 until 31 March 2019)
The grant supported/funded the following activities:
• Strengthening management and governance
o Engagement of two line managers (General Manager and Commercialisation Manager)
o Engagement of an overseas director to the Board
o Training of key management staff
• Financial operations
o Implementation of a commercialisation program for the Finance Department
o New financial management and billing system
o Staff training
o New accounting manual
• Technical operations
• Implementation of a loss reduction program
• A planned maintenance program for generation facilities in Honiara
• A distribution reinforcement program
• Improvement in system reliability
• Technical project implementation support
• Technical training program for engineering staff
Improving the cooling system of generators at Lungga.
Loss reduction studies
Replacement of the 11 kV switchboard at Honiara Power Station
Design, procurement, installation and commissioning of a new 33 kV, 3 core cable from Lungga to Ranadi 
Substation
Owner’s Engineer
Strengthen management 
6. Additional grant and credit funds
This component became effective 26th June 2014.The funding under this grant and credit was utilised to fund support for strengthening of management,
Tina River Hydropower project, project management support, strengthening the distribution network,
The additional grant and credit supported/funded the following activities:
Component 1
o Technical Assistance and Training on dispatch and control, system planning, integration of
renewables and IPPs
o Tina River Hydropower project connection study
o Cost of service and tariff review
o SCADA design
o Owner’s engineer
o General Manager Capital Works
o Financial modelling for Tina River Hydropower Project
Component 3
o Upgrade of transformer capacity and new 33 kV and 11 kV switchboards at Ranadi Substation
o 12.5 MVA 11/33 kV transformer at Lungga Power Station
o New zone substation at Kola’ Ridge with one 33kV/11 kV 12.5 MVA transformer
o Relocation of feeder 12 from Lungga Power Station to East Honiara Substation
o Stream Gauging for Tina River Hydropower Project
o Procurement of Ring Main Units
7. Assessment of Outcomes:
7.1 Background
SIEA has made a remarkable turnaround from 2007 from being in a very poor financial situation, 
poor governance and lack of proper management to now in 2019 humming with activity, with 
strong financials, strong governance, excellent management and excellent growth. Much of this 
transformation is as a result of two key initiatives of the Solomon Islands Government, the 
Shareholders of SIEA. These are:
The SOEs reform. SIG partnered with ADB to put in place the SOE Act 2007 and SOE Regulations in 
2010.
SIG and World Bank partnering in a project to revive SIEA, the SISEP
To the World Bank and ADB we are indeed indebted. We would also like to acknowledge and 
celebrate the support provided by our Shareholders, SIG.
7.2 Transitioning of SIEA 
7.2.1 Governance:
The Board is responsible for charting the Company’s strategic direction, for the setting of objectives, policy guidelines, goals management, and for monitoring the achievement of these 
matters. The Board is also responsible for reviewing the Business Plan, Corporate Plan and 
Statement of Corporate Objectives, and approves the Operating and Capital Budgets each year. 
The Board also reviews matters of a major or unusual nature, which are not in the ordinary 
course of business.
The Board appointments were strengthened under the SOE Act and associated Regulations. An 
independent international expert was appointed to the Board in April 2010 under funding from 
SISEP. Further impetus to governance was provided by the appointed to the Board of a new 
Chairman with wide ranging experience in the private sector. Additionally, governance was further 
strengthened by the appointment of independent directors with expertise in financial 
management, risk management, technical skills, human resources and strategy setting.
These Directors brought in experience and expertise in strategy setting, finance, legal, governance, 
engineering and provided the necessary support and guidance to Management. The Independent 
international expert on the board provided mentoring to management on a regular basis 
throughout his term of six years. The cost of his services were all funded under SISEP. 
The Board made a number of resolutions to improve procurement policy and procedures, HR 
policies, internal audit. In addition to this three board Sub-Committees (Audit and Finance, HR and 
Technical) were established with their charters and were made responsible for deliberating 
detailed issues and making suitable recommendations to the Board.
The Board also established an Internal Audit Department with Manager Internal Audit reporting 
directly to the Chairman of the Audit and Finance Sub-Committee of the Board. The department 
under guidance of the Sub-Committee carries out audits in accordance with an approved Annual 
Audit Plan. The outcomes of all audits were reported to the Audit and Finance Committee (now 
Audit, Finance, Risk and Governance) Sub-Committee. All actions were followed up and tracked 
until completion.
Since 2012 on an average the Board has had 9 board meetings annually. All these meetings are 
properly minuted in a timely manner and resolutions and actions tracked and reported by 
Management. Furthermore, the Board Sub-Committee also meet on an average at least three 
time annually providing the necessary support and guidance to Management and to the Board 
to make decisions.
All of the above would not be possible without the funding from SISEP. Furthermore, the 
missions from the World Bank during the term of the SISEP provided a monitoring, scrutiny and 
reporting role on the efficacy of the project and this further improved the focus of the 
Management and Board of SIEA.
7.2.2 Management
Under funding from SISEP, (mostly under the original IDA funding of USD4.0million) SIEA appointed 
a General Manager, a Commercialisation Manager, a Chief Financial Officer and a General 
Manager Capital Works. These appointments strengthened management.
The new management established a Procurement Policy and associated procedures, Human Resources Policy and Procedures Manual. Both of these were approved by the Board.
SISEP contributed to improve SIEA’s financial position during 2011-2014 which meant that the 
organisation could start funding some of these roles from end November 2014.
In November 2014, an expat was appointed as CEO and he replaced the outgoing General 
Manager. In addition, three expats were appointed in 2015 as Planning Engineer, Electrical 
Engineer and Manager Generation & Outstations. All these roles have been paid for by SIEA.
7.2.3 Financial/External Financial Annual Audits
SIEA has achieved financial stability. 2018 marks the 8th year in which the Authority has made a 
profit. Furthermore, the last 7 year’s statutory accounts have been unqualified, and signed off 
by the Auditor General before the mandated date of 31st March each year.
7.2.4 Training
SISEP funded many training programmes during its term of over 10 years.
The following training courses have been conducted in SIEA, some of which were funded by 
SISEP:
Lineman’s training courses commenced in 2013 (for the first time since 2003)
Power Station Operator Training for all Operators
First Aid training
Defensive Driving training
Training in Cable Jointing
Project Management Training
Meter Technician training
Training for accreditation of electricians
Training in DigSilent
Training in Homer
Attendance at conferences/seminars
University education in accounting, finance, engineering, commerce
Apprenticeship programme
Graduate programme
Line Mechanic training programme
Training in asset management system
Training in contract management
Leadership trainingAPTC training 
7.2.5 Capital Infrastructure Development
SISEP contributed to improve SIEA’s financial sustainability which meant that the company 
was able to conduct a program of investment on its own. Also improvements in SIEA’s 
governance and operational efficiency meant other donor partners such as JICA, ADB, Abu 
Dhabi Government, MFAT (NZ Government) were ready and felt confident enough to 
develop additional projects- so it created a conducive environment and enabled further 
investments.
We provide below a commentary on the projects totally funded by SIEA, projects funded 
under SISEP and other projects funded by donors.
From 2013 to 2018 SIEA has utilised its own funds to carry out the following projects:
Design, procurement and installation of 4X2.5 MW diesel generators plus associated 
equipment, new building, new workshop, one new 11/33 kV 10/12.5 MVA power 
transformer at Lungga Power Station at a total cost of SBD130m.
New generators, associated buildings and switchgear at Outstations Auki, Gizo, Munda, 
Noro and Tulagi.
Hybrid (solar, battery storage and back-up diesel generators) generation systems and 
associated distribution networks at Seghe and Taro at a total cost of SBD33 million.
Design, procurement and installation of two new 33/11 kV 10/12.5 MVA transformers at 
Honiara Power Station.
Business as usual projects
SIEA’s headquarters building at Ranadi refurbished and extendedIntegrated Business Management System
Two 1.5 MW generators commissioned in Honiara Power Station in 2013 (the first 
investment in generation by SIEA since 1993)
Vehicle monitoring system installed on all vehicles to improve efficiencies
Network extension
Hybrid station at Taro (Choiseul Province)New building housing the 4, 2.5 MW machines- in foreground- Lungga P.S.
Gizo power station with new generators
Under SISEP, SIEA completed the following projects during 2013-2018
New building and new 11 kV switchgear at Honiara Substation
Relocation of feeder 12 from Lungga Power Station to East Honiara Substation
Upgrade of Ranadi Substation 
New 33/11 kV Substation at Kola’a Ridge
Improved cooling systems on the generators at Lungga Power Station
Design, procurement, installation and commissioning of a new 33 kV 3 core cable from Lungga to Ranadi 
Substation
Design, procurement, installation and commissioning of a new 33 kV, 3 core cable from Lungga to Ranadi 
SubstationRanadi Substation before upgrade
Ranadi Substation after upgradeKola’a Ridge before upgrade
Kola’a Ridge Substation after upgrade11 kV switchboard at Honiara Power Station
11 kV feeder 12Other projects funded by donors (2014-2018)
Hybrid stations at Kirakira, Lata, Malu’u, Munda and Tulagi- in progress (Asian Development Bank)
1 MW Solar Farm at Henderson commissioned in May 2016 (UAE and NZ Governments)
Output based aid program- in progress (World Bank)
50 kW solar on Ranadi carport roof- commissioned August 2014 (JICA)
Staff training on the Electricity Tariff
7.2.6 Reduction of losses
The decline in SIEA’s financial situation in the period 2003-2010 appeared to be strongly 
correlated to the increase in the SIEA’s total losses. This was considered unacceptable for any 
power utility and the level of losses was one of the main factors in the SIEA being close to failing.
It was considered imperative in 2011 that urgent action is required by the Board, management 
and staff of SIEA to manage and reduce the losses.
SISEP funded a loss reduction study/program in the Honiara network. 
The study determined that the non-technical losses of 16% are exceptionally high and are 
resulting in lost revenue that is leading to financial stress. The study found that there are two 
main causes of the non-technical losses:
The metering and billing system are far below an acceptable standard with a significant amount 
of energy delivered not billed.
At the line staff level, the losses are generally accepted as “business as usual” and there is no focus on reducing the non-technical losses.
Under SISEP a program was put in place and implemented to improve the cooling system of the 
generators at Lungga Power Station which lead to improvement in their efficiencies and output.
SISEP also funded training and to increase focus of management to reduce losses.
The installation of more pre-payment (Cashpower meters), the replacement of current 
transformers and associated meters, testing the accuracy of meters utilising the state of art 
meter testing bench newly purchased from Itron, Spain; Inspection of all meters on an annual 
basis and ensuring all meters are properly registered in the billing system has led to a steady 
reduction of non-technical losses from 16% in 2008 to 6% in 2018.
7.2.7 Debtors
SISEP funded training initiatives which improved reporting at the Executive Management and 
the Board level. Special focus was put on reporting on debtors more than 30 days, more than 60 
days and more than 90 days.
Billing and collection of debt functions were part of the Finance Division up to 2011. SISEP 
funding boosted and strengthened Management and increased Governance as a result of which 
the management with the support of the Board re-structured the organization to create a new 
Customer Services Division which assumed the responsibility for all customer issues, from 
community awareness through its Public Relations Section, to receiving, processing and 
registration of customer applications for new customer connections, customer enquiries, 
cashiering, administering billing and customer accounts, protection of revenue meters and 
revenue collection. 
The Management with the support of the Board has carried out mass disconnections of some 
key customers for non-payment of bills.
The above concerted efforts have resulted in better debt collection.
8. SIEA today
The SISEP has made a remarkable impact on SIEA. SIEA is fundamentally different from what it 
was 10 years ago and has been for a number of years at the forefront of the commercialisation 
initiative of Solomon Islands Government (SIG). 
SISEP contributed by financing the management and a director on the board that affected these 
changes, also through direct capital investment programs. As SIEA started improving its financial 
position and capacity and capability to deliver better outcomes other donors also stepped in to 
assist SIEA.
SIEA was rated as one of the best performing SOEs in a benchmarking study conducted by the 
Asian Development Bank in 2014 which included 8 Pacific participating countries, Mauritius and 
Jamaica.
Over 2012-2018 years a significant improvement in the commercial sustainability of SP has been achieved. Prudent management has resulted in a situation where SP has been able to commit 
to a SBD 1 billion capital investment plan for the period 2019-2022.
The annual capital injection in financial years 2014- 2017 has been on an average SBD120 million. 
In addition to delivering the projects for the relocation of feeder 12 from Lungga Power Station 
to East Honiara Substation, Upgrade of Ranadi Substation and design, procurement and 
construction and commissioning of a new substation at Kola’a Ridge, SIEA has also replaced old 
generators and switchboards and distribution systems at 5 outstations, installed a 
commissioned 4 new 2.5 MW generators at Lungga Power Station, installed and commissioned 
2 new outstations (Seghe and Taro) and other capital infrastructure projects. 
The reliability indices SAIDI and SAIFI have shown remarkable improvement from 2007 to 2018 
and also the system losses have steadily dropped from a figure of 27% in 2007 and now at the 
end of 2018 it was at 17%.
The Net Profit after tax has shown a remarkable improvement from a loss of SBD44m in 2007 to 
SBD80m profit in 2018.
The revenue per kWh generated has increased from SBD1.39 per kWh in 2007 to SBD4.70 per 
kWh in December 2018.
SIEA purchased and implemented an Integrated Business Management System and a new Billing 
system in 2013
The organisation also developed a suite of policies and procedures with input from staff and 
these have been successfully implemented with awareness training being provided.
Furthermore, the average number of debtor days to collect billed revenue has dropped from 
360 days to 30 days in 2018, a remarkable achievement. SIEA’s Customer Services has been very 
vigilant in follow up with Debtors especially the big debtors and therefore the recoveries have 
been very good. SIEA has developed policies and procedures to handle non-payment of dues.
SIEA opened in 2013 the first “drive thru” for Cashpower top ups with extended hours at its 
Headquarters. In the same year SIEA also started cashpower top ups through mobile phone 
banking.
The penetration of Cashpower pre-paid meters exceed more than 80% of its customer base and 
this has assisted in cash flows. The monthly pre-paid sale is now over SBD10m (approximately 
25% of the monthly electricity revenue).
The organisation has transitioned from a position of insolvency to a vibrant, fully compliant SOE.
All the above has been possible due to very sound governance from the Board of Directors and a 
highly focused, well qualified, skilled, dedicated and an experienced Management team. One 
important catalyst for this remarkable turnaround is SISEP.
9. Key Factors affecting implementation and outcomes:The implementation of the project suffered and one of the factors contributing to delays was 
weaknesses in procurement which included delays in evaluation and non-timely submission of noobjections to the World Bank. During 2014-2015 SIEA’s capacity to conduct procurement in 
adherence to the Bank’s procurement guidelines were limited and this had an impact on the
delivery of the components of SISEP. 
Delayed recruitment to critical roles (example procurement specialist, owners engineer) 
impacted the implementation of the SISEP. Additionally, on a number of instances 
disbursements/application for disbursements were delayed due to absence of signatories. The 
project also suffered because SIEA was unable to arrange work permits, visas and resident permits 
in a timely manner for new appointments.
Another factor that contributed to the delays in implementation was SIEA’s inability to source 
qualified and skilled contractors to carry out the works. The highly skilled contracting market in 
Solomon Islands is very limited and therefore we have to source design and construct 
contractors for electricity substation, feeder, transformer upgrade/replacement work from the 
international market. Given the dis-economies of scale, risk factors associated with the Pacific 
region and tyranny of distance and lack of logistics SIEA has struggled to attract, engage and 
retain qualified contractors.
Lack of capacity, experienced personnel in SIEA was another factor which resulted in SIEA not 
been able to submit the SISEP quarterly reports in a timely manner.
Delayed acquisition of land, easements have also impacted on the implementation of SISEP.
10. Learnings and proposed actions to improve
The key learnings from the implementation of the SISEP is the following:
• In the first instance for all future projects we should recruit to the role of the Procurement 
Specialist
• SIEA should be well equipped in terms of personnel who are skilled, experienced and well qualified
• Expedite arrangement of work permits, visas and resident permits for all new appointments in a 
timely manner
• Better liaison with MMERE, MOFT and other Ministries in the Solomon Islands with a view to 
educate them on the donor funded projects and how they could assist SIEA
• Develop strong professional relationship with the contractors with the aim to improve retention
• Restructure the Capital Works & Planning area with a view to empower young personnel
The role of Procurement Specialist is pivotal in preparing scopes, TORs and assisting and expediting the 
recruitment to other roles and for the procurement of consultants and contractors (EPC, Design and 
construct and others). SIEA has already made an excellent beginning in his aspect on the Solomon Islands 
Electricity Access and Renewable Energy Expansion Project (SIEAREEP). This new project commenced in 
October 2018 and we have on board since January 2019 a Procurement Specialist.
SIEA has already initiated action to set up meetings with representatives of Ministry of Labour, Industry, 
Commerce and Immigration. Also a number of meetings have already been held with the Commissioner 
of Lands with the purpose to resolve issues to expeditiously acquire land for the proposed solar farms and 
easements for transmission/distribution lines.SIEA is also having regular meetings with Senior representatives from the Seventh Day Adventist Church 
to acquire the easement for the proposed 66 kV transmission from Tina River Hydropower site to Lungga 
Power Station and also for land for the proposed grid connect solar projects at Lungga. It is pleasing to 
note that this close engagement with the Executive of SDA Church is already bearing fruits.
Representatives from SIEA’s corporate services division are having regular catch up meetings with the key 
personnel in the Ministry of Labour, Industry, Commerce and Immigration (MLICI). Corporate Services 
Division has already in-sourced the function of arranging work permits, visas and resident permits for 
expats. This direct close liaison and relationship with the Ministry will assist SIEA to acquire work permits, 
visas, resident permits in a timely manner for the new appointments and for the renewal of the existing 
permits.
Since early 2018 SIEA has been developing a young engineer in the Capital Works team and he has been 
entrusted the responsibility to prepare the quarterly reports for SISEP. The quality of the reports being 
prepared by him during the last three quarters have shown improvement. Also late last year the Capital 
Works and Planning areas have been re-structured. In the new structure four managerial roles have been 
assigned to four young local upcoming engineers. This empowerment has already shown that they are 
willing to take more responsibility and accept accountability. We will therefore see further improvements 
in the execution of SIEAREEP.
SIEA has also commenced an Apprenticeship Program and a Line Mechanic Trainee Program. The 
organization also has strengthened the existing Graduate Training program. Furthermore, SIEA has also 
put in place a Talent Pool Development and Succession Plan. All these will enable SIEA in the development 
and sustenance of human capital.
All of the above will place SIEA in good stead to progress all future projects in a timely manner.
11. Sustainability
The structure of the project was designed to ensure all achievements made during its lifetime are 
sustainable. Instead of recruiting short-term Consultants fly in fly out for the key roles the SISEP was 
designed in Consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Treasury and the Board of SIEA for long term 
engagements such that sustainability could be maintained in the long term.
The General Manager, Commercialisation Manager, Chief Financial Officer and General Manager Capital 
Works were all recruited each for a term of 3 years. For some of these roles an extension of up to 18 
months was also provided.
Additionally, the International Board Director was on the Board of SIEA for approximately 6 years.
These long term contracts all funded under SISEP provided continuity of employment/engagement to all 
the above executive personnel who could then make appropriate changes, policy decisions, enhancing 
and strengthening reporting at the executive level and the Board level for the long term which started 
bearing fruits for SIEA and have been sustainable over the last 6 years.
The International Board Director provided mentoring and training to the management and also 
improved the strategy and policy setting and reporting on generation statistics, the losses, debtors, cash 
flows, debt recovery. The International Board Director departed in August 2016 and since then there has 
been no replacement.
Despite this SIEA has continued to perform very well financially and has met all its mandatory statutory 
obligations in a timely manner. The organization has continued to generate healthy profits, has a strong 
balance sheet, healthy cash flows and has managed to deliver an extensive capital infrastructure 
investment program. Furthermore, the key performance indicators in SISEP have shown improvement 
and sustainability.
SIEA has matured over the last seven years and is now in a position to sustain an ambitious capital 
investment plan to achieve two key objectives which are:
• Improve affordability• Improve accessibility
The sustainability could not have been achieved if SISEP had taken a short term view.
12. Cancellation and reallocation of Funds
In the second half of 2017 it was realized that there would be project cost savings. This was due 
to savings obtained in the Capital Works contract and to a change in plans as with regards to 
installation of a transformer in Lungga, as it was decided that it would be more cost efficient for 
SIEA to purchase the transformer through the project but perform its installation in-house. 
At that stage it was estimated that there would be US$2.5million of unallocated funds under the 
project. In March 2018 this estimate was revised upwards to USD3.3 million.
In light of the above, and given the impending closing date of 31 March 2019, SIEA , through the 
Ministry of Finance and Treasury, approached the World Bank and requested that a total of 
US$3.3 million equivalent originally allocated towards IDA credit IDA-53790 be cancelled from 
the project and reallocated to the Solomon Islands Electricity Access and Renewable Energy 
Expansion Project (P162902).
The cancellation and re-allocation of funds was approved by the World Bank in March 2018.
However, it needs to be acknowledged that SIEA underestimated in March 2018 the cancellation 
and re-allocation amount. As a result of this, as at 31 March 2019 the undisbursed amount is 
USD 0.90 million.
Appendix 1
PROJECT RESULTS FRAMEWORK
ORIGINAL GRANT
Project Development Objectives
The objective of the project is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial 
sustainability of SIEA.
INDICATOR 
NAME
UNIT OF 
MEASURE
DETAILS ACTIONS COMMENTS
PDO INDICATOR
STRENGTHENING 
MANAGEMENT 
TEXT Appointment of 
Commercialisation 
Manager
Commercialisation 
Manager appointed 
June 2009
Completed
General Manager GM Appointed CompletedMarch 2010
International 
Director
International 
Director appointed 
May 10
Completed
Appointment of 
Chief Financial 
Officer
CFO appointed 
February 2011
Completed
Appointment of GM 
Capital Works
GM Capital Works 
appointed in 
December 2014
Completed
FINANCIAL 
OPERATIONS
TEXT Fuel and lubricant 
contract through 
tender
New fuel and 
lubricant contract 
sourced through a 
competitive 
process providing 
cost savingscontract signed in 
April 2010
Completed
New General 
Ledger and Billing 
System
Installation, 
integration and 
commissioning of 
new General Ledger 
and Billing System 
completed in 
August 2010
Completed
Installation and 
commissioning of 
prepayment meters
More prepayment 
meters were 
installed and 
commissioned
End 2018 the count is 
14817 prepay meters 
(87% of all meters)
Corporate Planning 
process- to produce 
a 5 year strategic 
plan including 
capital investment 
plan for the Board
In accordance with 
the SOE Act the 
Statement of 
Corporate 
Objectives were 
prepared and 
delivered to the 
Accountable 
Ministers
Completed
RELIABILITY TEXT SAIDI Target 2000 minutes annual 1757.6 minutes in March 
2019
SAIFI Target 85 times 17.5 times in March 2019
Loss reduction Reduced from 27% in 
2007 to 17.3% in 2019
Maintenance of 
generators
All generators are 
maintained/overhauled 
as required on the 
number of hours of 
operation. A 
maintenance schedule 
has been established and 
adhered to.
Cooling system 
improvements
Generator Water cooling 
system at Lungga Power 
Station upgraded. This 
has improved the 
efficiency of the 
generators in the Old 
Power House.
Technical Training Training for operators, 
Linemen trainingongoing
Appendix 2
REVISED PROJECT RESULTS FRAMEWORK
Project Development Objectives
The objective of the project is to improve operational efficiency, system reliability and financial 
sustainability of SIEA.
Indicator Name Unit of 
Measure
Baseline End Target
As at 31 
March 2019
Comments
PDO Indicator
Quarterly financial 
management 
reports, and rolling 
projections for 
Text December 2007
No. The 14 days 
target was not 
Yes (SIEA 
should 
achieve the 
14 days 
Progressive 
improvements over the 
years. AchievedSIEA performance 
within 14 days 
after end of each 
quarter
achieved. target)
Number of days 
between due date 
of customer bill, 
and if not paid, 
notice of arrears
365 days in 2008 15 days Progressive 
improvements over the 
years. Achieved
System Average 
Interruption 
Duration Index 
(SAIDI)
Minutes 51840 2000 minutes 
annual
SAIDI = Sum of 
(interruption duration 
in minutes * number of 
customers affected) 
divided by the Total 
number of customers 
served.
In financial year 2017 it 
was measured as 1920 
minutes
In financial 2018 it was 
measured as 2213 
minutes.
For the first quarter of 
2019 it was measured 
as 1757.6. Achieved. 
System Average 
Interruption 
Frequency Index 
(SAIFI)
Times 816 85 times SAIFI = Total number of 
interruptions divided 
by Total number of 
customers served.
In financial year 2017 it 
was measured as 21.6 
times.
In financial 2018 it was 
measured as 17.4 
times. 
For the first quarter of 
2019 it was measured 
as 17.5. Achieved.System losses % December 2007 at 
27%
18% System losses have 
steadily decreased over 
the years and now are 
at 17%.
In financial year 2018 it 
was 17%
At the end of March 
2019 it was 17.3%. 
ACHIEVED
Average number of 
debtor days to 
collect billed 
revenue
Days December 2007
360 days
35 days Achieved 33.61 days
Collection ratio Percentage 72 70 60
Revenue per kWh 
generated
Text SBD1.39/kWh SBD 4.5/kWh Achieved SBD 
$4.64/kWh
Intermediate Indicators
Commissioning of 
2 Nos. 10/12.5 
MVA 33kV/11kV 
transformers and a 
second 33 kV 
switchboard and a 
second 11 kV 
switchboard and 
associated 
equipment at 
Ranadi Substation
Text 31 March 
2019
Achieved on 31 March 
2019
New Kola'a Ridge 
33/11kV 
Substation 
commissioned with 
one 10/12.5MVA 
transformer, 33 kV 
and 11 kV 
switchboards and 
Text 31 March 
2019
Achieved on 10 March 
2019associated 
equipment
Feeder 12 load 
relocated from 
Lungga 11kV 
generation bus to 
East Honiara 
Substation
Text 31 March 
2019
Achieved on 30 
November 2018
Procurement of 
one 12.5/15MVA 
11/33kV 
transformer at 
Lungga Power 
Station
Text 31 March 
2019
Achieved in September 
2018
Net Profit before 
Tax
Text SBD44 million SBD98 million Achieved SBD91million, 
SBD107 million,SBD120 
million, SBD80million 
and SBD80million in 
2014,2015,2016,2017 
and 2018 financial 
years respectivelyANNEX 6. SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS (IF ANY)
1. SISEP Project Appraisal Document (P100311, Report No: 43120-SB, June 12, 2008)
2. SISEP Restructuring Project Paper (Report No: 67646 v2, January 22, 2012)
3. SISEP Additional Financing and Restructuring Project Paper (Report No: 84643-SB, February 13, 
2014)
4. SISEP Restructuring Project Paper (Report No: RES31408, April 2018)
5. Financing Agreements for SISEP on file
6. Project Agreements on file
7. Regional Engagement Framework FY2006-2009 for Pacific Islands (Report no: 32261-EAP, May 3, 
2005)
8. Interim Strategy Note for the Solomon Islands for the period FY10-FY11 (Report No: 53496-SB, 
March 12, 2010)
9. Solomon Islands Systematic Country Diagnostic Priorities for Supporting Poverty Reduction and 
Promoting Shared Prosperity (Report No: 115425-SB, June 1, 2017)
10. Country Partnership Framework for Solomon Islands for the period FY2018-FY2023 (Report no: 
122600-SB, June 26, 2018)
11. Finding Balance 2016, Benchmarking the performance of state-owned enterprises in island 
countries, Asian Development Bank, ISBN 978-92-9257-581-6 (Print), 978-92-9257-582-3 (eISBN)