File Name: SLE-CPD-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Sierra Leone
Country Code: SLE
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 3-6 September 2019
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
1 July 2019
Original: Language
1911136X (E) 230719 
Second regular session 2019
3-6 September 2019, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Sierra Leone
(2020-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Sierra Leone (2020-2023) 9I. Programme rationale
1. Since the end of the civil war in 2002, Sierra Leone has made progress in consolidating peace 
and creating the foundations for a strong, stable and resilient nation. In March 2019 the Government 
launched its Medium-Term National Development Plan 2019-2023, which focuses on human capital 
development and integrates the Sustainable Development Goals, African Union Agenda 2063 and 
the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States.1 UNDP supported a development finance 
assessment to design an integrated financing framework for the implementation of the Plan. Sierra 
Leone was one of the first countries to present its voluntary national review report to the high-level 
political forum on sustainable development in 2016 and will do so again in 2019.
2. In 2018, Sierra Leone held its fourth general election that was praised by international observers 
as credible and peaceful.
2 This culminated in a second peaceful transition of authority from one 
political party to another since the end of the civil war. Because of the impressive gains, the 2018 
Global Peace Index ranked the country as the most peaceful in West Africa, the third most peaceful 
in sub-Saharan Africa and the thirty-fifth most peaceful in the world.3
3. Despite these gains, the rate of income poverty was 57 per cent in 2018 (rural: 72.4 per cent; 
urban: 41.2 per cent) compared to 52.9 per cent in 2011.
4 The rate of multidimensional poverty is 
64.8 per cent (rural: 86.3 per cent; urban: 37.6 per cent),
5
an indication that a majority of the 
population suffers deprivations in key basic service sectors (health, energy, sanitation, education).
6
Female-headed households have a higher level of multidimensional poverty (65.9 per cent) than 
male-headed households (64.2 per cent). 
4. Poverty persists primarily because of four interdependent drivers: limited and inequitable 
provision and access to basic services rooted in continued centralization and corruption; limited 
employment and livelihood opportunities, especially for youth and persons living with disabilities,
rooted in an exclusive and extractive sector-reliant economy; inequality and discrimination against 
women and persons with disabilities rooted in cultural norms and practices; and recurrent disasters 
due to increasing vulnerability to climate change-related stresses. 
5. As part of its post-war rebuilding, Sierra Leone through the 2004 Local Government Act 
committed to decentralization and devolution of basic service delivery functions to local councils. 
But 15 years on, real devolution of functions and resources to the councils has been slow. Between 
2009 and 2017, the Government reintroduced the district officer role, usurping the functions of local 
councils. The renewed dominance of the central authority and the declining role of local authority 
impact negatively on access to quality basic services and account for rural-urban inequalities.
7
 
6. Corruption remains the dominant driver of the overcentralization and ineffectiveness of 
governance. Sierra Leone ranks well below the regional average on indicators of government 
effectiveness, regulatory quality and rule of law.
8 Corruption has undermined the effectiveness of 
the rule of law, access to justice and good governance and significantly weakened oversight 
institutions. The Government with UNDP support has established structures, laws, policies and 
processes for the efficient functioning of the justice and security chain. However, implementation 
of the policies is undermined by corruption and poor performance. Weak police-community 
relations, delays in the dispensation of justice and discriminatory practices against women that
expose them to sexual and gender-based violence are manifestations of corruption and the 
ineffectiveness of government.
 
1 Sierra Leone’s Medium-Term National Development Plan 2019-2023: Education for Development, p.vi.
2 European Union Election Observation Mission, Final Report Republic of Sierra Leone Presidential, Parliamentary and Local 
Council Elections 2018.
3
Institute for Economics & Peace. Global Peace Index 2018: Measuring Peace in a Complex World, Sydney, June 2018. 
4 Sierra Leone’s Medium-Term National Development Plan 2019-2023: Education for Development.
5
Ibid.
6
Ibid.
7 Si
LCCtAtStb2018DP/DCP/SLE/4
7. Since the end of the Ebola virus disease crisis and the slump in the price of iron ore in 2014-
2015, the economy is making slow and fragile rebounds. Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose 
to 6.3 per cent in 2016 from -20 per cent in 2014-2015, dropping to 3.5 per cent in 2017 and 2018.
9
 
The fragility of the economy is largely due to its overreliance on the extractive sector. Mineral 
exports contribute 24 per cent of GDP and more than 90 per cent of export earnings10 but do not 
provide significant opportunities for decent jobs. 
8. Agriculture represents more than 60 per cent of GDP and is the sector where the most vulnerable 
in rural communities participate.
11 The productivity in the sector is far below its potential and is 
largely characterized by subsistence farming, limited value added and low wages. Tourism and 
investment in the blue economy represent untapped potential for inclusive economic growth. 
Fisheries alone have the potential to generate over $100 million annually and directly employ 
200,000 people.
12
 
9. The exclusive and extractive-dependent economy impacts on private sector development. The 
private sector is too small to generate a significant number of decent job opportunities to match the 
increasing demand for employment, especially among youth (15-35 years), 70 per cent of whom are 
unemployed.
13 Unreliable electricity supply, limited access to financial services, lack of skilled 
human resources and high levels of informality further complicate private sector development. 
10. Sierra Leone has one of the highest gender inequality rates in the world (0.65 in 2015). The 
Africa Human Development Report 2016 indicated that women in Sierra Leone achieve only 81.4
per cent of the level achieved by men in terms of health, education, control of economic resources 
and freedoms, below the 87 per cent average for sub-Saharan Africa.
14 The percentage of women in 
elected positions is very low: 12.4 per cent in Parliament; 18 per cent in local councils; and 6.6 per 
cent among paramount chiefs.
15 The impact of inequality and discrimination permeates the 
socioeconomic fabric of the society with 84 per cent of rural and 63 per cent of urban women 
operating in the informal sector with low wages, poor working conditions and no social protection.
16
11. Persons with disabilities are rarely accounted for in most socioeconomic data. The 2015 census 
estimated that they account for 1.3 per cent of the population but this is an underestimation. The 
National Development Plan recognizes that the Government has made limited investment in their
needs, including delays in the implementation of the Disability Act.17
12. Sierra Leone ranks 155 of 180 countries in the 2018 Environmental Performance Index.
18
 The 
low performance is largely due to unregulated negative practices and limited capacity to adapt to 
climate change and recover from disasters. Despite its high vulnerability to disasters, the country 
lacks a comprehensive legal framework and institutional capacity to respond to disasters and build 
community resilience. 
13. UNDP has accumulated a capital of trust as a responsive, dependable partner that has supported 
crucial reforms and institution-building in Sierra Leone including as lead support for the 
constitutional review process, the structural reforms in Parliament and the formulation of the Local 
Government Act on which decentralization and access to services are anchored. UNDP leads in
supporting the rebuilding of the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development which was 
delinked from the Ministry of Finance in 2018. 
 
9 Inaugural Address by His Excellency President Dr Julius Maada Bio on 12th May 2018.
10 Sierra Leone Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative: https://eiti.org/sierra-leone. 
11Inaugural Address by His Excellency President Dr Julius Maada Bio 12th May 2018.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 UNDP, Africa Human Development Report 2016: Accelerating Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Africa, New 
York, 2016.
15 National Electoral Commission (available on: http://necsl.org/)
16 Statistics Sierra Leone, 2015 Population and Housing Census. 
17 M
diTNtil Dlt Pl2019202314. These unparalleled roles and track records reinforce the comparative advantage of UNDP as an 
integrator, connecting development activities and forging synergy; as a thought leader on policy 
reforms, institution-building and development planning; and as the closest partner to the 
Government and civil society organizations (CSOs) promoting democracy and peace. Development 
partners also rely on UNDP for access to key government institutions and leaders. UNDP leads 
United Nations inter-agency and development partners’ groups on the justice and security sector;
on advancing the Sustainable Development Goals, including the country’s readiness for the 
voluntary national reviews; on environmental protection and conservation; and on youth 
empowerment. 
15. The independent evaluation of the country programme 2015-2018 (extended to 2019) 
confirmed the competitiveness of UNDP. It noted the country office ability to respond effectively 
to several external shocks. This affected the implementation of its planned goals under the 
programme. However, the country office still achieved significant results in elections and the rule 
of law and increased income generation to local governments.19 The evaluation outlined the 
following recommendations to improve the design and implementation of the country programme 
document, including: embedding crisis response readiness in the programme; clearly defining 
strategies and providing leadership to ensure coherence across all interventions; adopting area-based 
approaches in implementation; and continued positioning of UNDP as a convener and integrator of 
sustainable development support.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
16. The goal of the country programme 2020-2023 is to support the people of Sierra Leone to 
eradicate poverty and build resilience to climate change shocks and disasters. The programme, 
prepared in consultation with national partners,
20 will contribute to the goals of the Medium-Term 
National Development Plan, which contends that bolstering human capital development is a 
fundamental pathway to achieving middle-income status and the Sustainable Development Goals.
17. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2020-2023 recognizes the 
Government’s development pathways and will contribute to achieving four interrelated outcomes: 
(a) sustainable agriculture, food and nutrition; (b) transformational governance; (c) access to basic 
services; and (d) protection and empowerment of the most vulnerable. Informed by the UNDP 
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, specifically its signature solutions, the programme will contribute to the 
UNDAF outcomes through two interrelated clusters: (a) inclusive democratic governance, based on 
signature solutions 1, 2 and 6, contributing to UNDAF outcome 2; and (b) sustainability and 
inclusive local economic development, based on signature solutions 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 and contributing 
to UNDAF outcomes 1, 3 and 4.
18. At upstream level, the programme will help to improve the legal, policy and institutional 
environment to facilitate the eradication of poverty and build resilience, complemented by 
downstream activities to address the challenges of poverty. What distinguishes this from the 
previous programme is the emphasis on downstream interventions through an area-based approach
and focus on women, youth and persons with disabilities. It will focus on eight of the 16 districts.
The districts will be selected based on high incidence of multidimensional poverty, their strategic 
significance as cross-border districts with countries in the Mano River Union (MRU) or their 
potential for harnessing the blue economy and reversing coastal erosion to scale up job creation. 
19. The programme theory of change follows: stable and entrenched democratic institutions are 
foundations for inclusion, sustaining peace and attracting private sector investment for job creation 
and poverty eradication; decentralized governance brings service delivery closer to people, 
contributing to access to justice for women, girls and persons with disabilities; transparent and 
accountable governance reduces corruption, making government more responsive and effective; 
 
19 Independent country programme evaluation report, December 2018.
20 UNDP d
ftf tkhldlttifild hld if t d CSO DP/DCP/SLE/4
local economic development improves inclusion, reduces inequality and brings opportunities closer 
to people, the best chance for leaving no one behind; and sustainably harnessing Sierra Leone’s 
vast natural assets through private sector development will accelerate economic growth, ensure 
livelihoods for communities, build resilience and reduce climate-related risks and disasters. 
20. The programme will adopt as operating principles innovation and technology, empowerment, 
evidence-based solutions, partnerships and risk and fragility sensitivity. UNDP will ensure that its 
Accelerator Lab analyses and strengthens all programmes with innovation and technology 
resources; empower communities by drawing on community-generated initiatives and strengthening 
voice and social accountability; track progress through real-time big data and the multidimensional 
poverty index; and forge partnerships. 
21. The development finance assessment conducted exposed UNDP and the Government to a range 
of opportunities and the shifting trends in the donor landscape. Hence, UNDP has developed a 
partnership and communication strategy and action plan aimed at guiding its resource mobilization 
efforts in more innovative ways. UNDP will continue to strengthen relations with its traditional 
partners; engage non-traditional partners including international financial institutions, the private 
sector and foundations; and promote government cost sharing including introducing the 
Government to the emergency community infrastructure project model with Senegal and/or Togo. 
UNDP will deepen engagement with the Green Climate Fund (GCF), Adaptation Fund and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF) in partnership with the Government and other United Nations
agencies.
22. The programme will be guided by the human rights-based approach, ensuring equity in 
beneficiary selections and the protection of the vulnerable throughout the implementation cycle. 
Specifically, it will promote gender equity in project teams and among stakeholders. All activities 
will be developed and conducted in line with the UNDP gender equality strategy including 
allocating at least 15 per cent of the programme budget to gender-related initiatives. Women and 
persons with disabilities will be encouraged to participate in all stages of project implementation, if 
necessary with affirmative measures such as bringing project activities close to areas safe for women 
and persons with disabilities and supporting child care and access ramps where requested. 
Inclusive democratic governance 
23. On strengthening democratic institutions, UNDP will support the completion of the 
constitutional review process started in 2014 and further strengthen electoral management bodies 
including the National Electoral Commission (NEC), Political Parties Registration Commission 
(PPRC), and electoral courts, in partnership with the European Union, United Kingdom Department 
for International Development (DfID) and Irish Aid. Key areas of focus include improving the 
electoral laws; promoting the establishment of an electoral support fund; advocating for the 
affirmative action bill for increased representation of women in elected office; and supporting the 
PPRC to promote inter-party dialogue. UNDP will support the Government to establish an electoral 
cycle management steering committee to drive these reforms.
24. On strengthening oversight, UNDP will support capacity-building for the 85 per cent of 
Members of Parliament (MPs) who are new MPs in areas such as consensus-building, law making
and outreach; and support the Women’s Caucus (12.3 per cent of MPs) through South-South 
cooperation with Rwanda and Uganda on how to champion legislation that is responsive to gender 
and persons with disabilities. UNDP will support strengthening of the Human Rights Commission 
(HRC), the Independent Police Complaint Board (IPCB) and the Anti-Corruption Commission 
(ACC) in partnership with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN-Women), the European Union, DfID and Irish Aid.
25. On anti-corruption and effective governance, UNDP will support the Government through:
making systems more transparent (for example through e-governance); building CSO capacities to 
champion social accountability; building integrity and values through integrity committees and 
networks in schools; and linking government institutions with good governance practices and antiaddressing corruption in environmental governance through making regulations public and
establishing community watch groups for protected areas.
26. On access to justice and protecting human rights, UNDP will continue support for the rule of 
law and emphasize gender justice as an approach for strengthening access to justice and security. 
This will include addressing sexual and gender-based violence, inheritance rights, speedy legal 
redress and representation, legal identity for women and access to quality and decentralized basic 
services. UNDP will continue to support the HRC and strengthen its capacity to support the gender
justice agenda. UNDP will partner and/or coordinate with the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), UN-Women, DfID, Irish Aid and the European Union to take to scale the successful 
initiatives through the justice and security group which UNDP coordinates. 
27. On peacebuilding and social cohesion, UNDP will support the establishment and/or 
strengthening of the infrastructure for peace for conflict prevention, mediation and reconciliation; 
and support cross-border community security and development to improve security and trust 
between communities and security institutions in targeted border districts. UNDP will collaborate 
with the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and the MRU Secretariat, CSOs and 
national security structures and media. 
28. On local governance and service delivery, UNDP will support the review of the national 
decentralization policy and the 2004 Local Government Act; harmonize the relationship between 
local councils and the Council of Paramount Chiefs to ensure peace, reduce corruption and achieve 
development results; and support requisite technical, administrative and technological capacities 
including through South-South and triangular cooperation with Ghana, Kenya and Rwanda on 
innovative ways for local councils to provide quality service delivery that is conducive to the needs 
of women and persons with disabilities. The improved local government and service delivery 
environment will facilitate local economic development, the protection of human rights and 
community empowerment. UNDP will partner with and complement the work of the Japan 
International Cooperation Agency (JICA), European Union, United Nations Capital Development 
Fund (UNCDF) and the World Bank, all of which are working to strengthen local governance.
Sustainability and inclusive local economic development 
29. This cluster will promote the nexus between reducing environmental vulnerability, building 
disaster resilience and poverty eradication. On reducing environmental vulnerability, UNDP will 
support the land reform policy implementation in partnership with the Food and Agricultural 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and World Bank to improve access to land for women
and persons with disabilities; rehabilitate and protect mangrove ecosystems, reduce deforestation 
and land degradation, manage the use of community natural assets and support sustainable 
livelihoods; support the expansion of sustainable ecotourism for job creation; and support 
development of renewable, affordable and efficient energy solutions through private sector 
partnerships. 
30. On building climate and disaster resilience, UNDP will support the finalization of the disaster 
risk management policy and the transformation of the Disaster Management Department into an 
independent agency; mitigation and preparedness work, including for health emergencies, through 
the expansion and strengthening of the capacities of community disaster management committees 
and the Sierra Leone Meteorological Agency; and strengthening of partnerships with the GEF, GCF,
World Agroforestry Centre, Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers, and the 
World Health Organization to improve UNDP research and thought leadership role. 
31. On inclusive local economic development, UNDP will take to scale its multi-stakeholder 
public-private partnerships for local private sector development and revenue generation21 initiative 
as the platform for achieving local economic development. UNDP will enhance the employability 
of youths (focusing on women and persons with disabilities), expand its graduate internship 
programme and career advisory and placement services, in alignment with the National Youth 
 DP/DCP/SLE/4
Service; promote mass job creation through support to value chains in the agricultural, mining and 
fishery sectors, including promoting farm-to-market networks and community cooperatives;
expand the business development services programme in partnership with UNCDF and the 
International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) to link beneficiaries to financial services; 
support harmonization of maritime policies and strategies of MRU countries to reduce illegal fishing 
and other maritime-related criminality; and build awareness about harnessing the blue economy in 
all targeted coastal districts. 
III. Programme and risk management
32. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter 
levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and 
operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. Compliant with Executive 
Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated with project implementation will be charged to 
the concerned projects. Structures and procedures will be reviewed to ensure they are fit for purpose 
and remain flexible to evolving contexts, especially in a crisis-prone context like Sierra Leone. The 
programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct 
execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force majeure and weak national 
capacity.
33. The assumptions underpinning the theory of change and programme implementation are likely 
to encounter the following risks: (a) corruption and poor financial management increases the 
programme integrity management costs; (b) limited staff capacity in UNDP, Government and CSO 
implementing partners affects timely and quality delivery; (c) lack of quality and real-time data 
undermines monitoring of progress; (d) the slow pace of the economy negatively affects government 
cost sharing and delivery of complementary projects; (e) exclusion of women and persons with 
disabilities in project implementation; (f) major natural disasters including disease outbreak derail 
implementation; and (g) difficulty in mobilizing sufficient resources in light of shrinking donor 
space affects full programme implementation. 
34. To mitigate these risks, UNDP, in close collaboration with partners, will develop projectspecific and portfolio-level risk logs. These will be regularly monitored by project officers, UNDP 
senior management and portfolio steering committees. UNDP will: (a) continue to use the 
harmonized approach to cash transfers, in collaboration with other United Nations agencies, to 
ensure that approaches to cash transfer, disbursement and frequency of quality assurance activities 
are central to the programme implementation cycle; (b) provide continuous capacity-building 
support to institutions for public procurement and internal audit, to mitigate risks and enhance 
accountability and transparency in the management of resource, and to national statistics institutions 
to generate and manage data; (c) conduct a stakeholder mapping ahead of all project implementation 
to ensure the equitable inclusion of women and persons with disabilities; and (d) develop a robust 
learning plan and budget to strengthen country office staff capacity and continue to strengthen the 
capacities within ministries, departments and agencies and CSOs through joint work planning and 
field monitoring, training and facilitating South-South and triangular cooperation.
35. UNDP will: (a) support early detection and analysis of the risks of natural disasters including 
climate risks, drawing on the UNDP social and environmental standards, to contain the immediate 
consequences of major natural disasters and accelerate recovery; and (b) draw on the United Nations 
Country Team crisis contingency plan (for which UNDP leads recovery planning), strengthen the 
country office business continuity plan with support from the United Nations Department of Safety 
and Security and, where necessary, roll out the UNDP fast-track modality and request surge support 
in emergency situations. Although Sierra Leone enjoys peace, UNDP will monitor conflict trends 
and where needed coordinate with the Resident Coordinator for quiet diplomacy.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. Results-based management will underpin programme delivery. The programme indicators are 
aligned with global indices such as the Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Transparency 
International Corruption Perceptions Index, Human Development Index and Environmental
Performance Index, to assess the programme’s contribution to impact indicators. At the output 
level, the indicators are aligned with the National Development Plan and UNDAF. The 
multidimensional poverty index will assess the dynamics, progress and trends of poverty 
eradication.
37. Regular joint monitoring missions with national partners, donors and other United Nations
agencies will be conducted to ensure that programme activities are implemented as per design. The 
UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor country programme expenditures. Lessons learned 
from implementation will be documented and utilized to improve the quality of ongoing and future 
interventions. 
38. UNDP relies on the micro- and macrodata generated from the national statistical system 
coordinated by Statistics Sierra Leone and other ministries, departments and agencies. UNDP will 
strengthen national monitoring and evaluation systems, particularly at the Ministry of Planning and 
Economic Development and Statistics Sierra Leone for timely production and publication of data. 
39. Outcome-level evaluations have been costed and scheduled to be conducted periodically by 
relevant portfolios. The cost of data collection, monitoring and quality assurance will be met by 
allocating at least 3 per cent of programme resources to monitoring and evaluation. To strengthen 
communication support to the programme, 1.5 per cent of programme resources will be allocated to
communicating development results and promoting the work of UNDP in Sierra Leone. Annex. Results and resources framework for Sierra Leone (2020-2023)
NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL: Addressing Vulnerabilities and Building Resilience (Cluster 7)
UNDAF OUTCOME 1: By 2023, Sierra Leone benefits from a more productive, commercialized and sustainable agriculture, improved food and nutrition security, and increased resilience 
to climate change and other shocks
UNDP Strategic Plan 2018-2021: Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions (Outcome 1)
UNDAF outcome, indicators 
baselines, targets
Data source, frequency of data 
collection, responsibilities Indicative outputs
Major partners / 
partnerships
frameworks
Indicative 
resources by 
outcome ($)
1.1: Percentage increase in forest 
cover
B: 42.98 % (2016) 
T: 48% 
1.2: Area (hectares) of wetlands 
restored
B: 0 hectares
T: 500 hectares
1.3: Area (hectares) of degraded 
land 
restored/reclaimed/rehabilitated
B: 0 hectares
T: 1,000 hectares
1.4: Proportion of people 
practising disaster preparedness 
and response systems, 
disaggregated by sex
B: 0%
T: 40% (Males 20%, Females 
20%)
S: FAO/Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry 
(MAF) survey
F: Every 2-3 years
R: FAO 
S: National Protected Area 
Authority (NPAA)
F: Biennial
R: UNDP
S: Coastal vulnerability 
assessment
F: Biennial
R: UNDP
S: Survey reports, Partners’ 
reports
F: Biennial
R: UNDP
1.1 Relevant ministries/departments/agencies have strengthened 
capacities to enforce inclusive regulations and gender-responsive 
policies on conservation of protected areas in coastal and urban 
planning and development
1.1.1: # of newly endorsed policies by cabinet on coastal communities and 
protected areas that are gender- responsive
B: 0
T: 2
S: Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), MAF
F: Annually
1.1.2: # of ministries/departments/agencies with strengthened capacities to 
enforce regulations and policies on coastal communities and protected 
areas 
B: 2
T: 4
S: Independent evaluation reports, project reports
F: Annually
1.1.3: # of ministries/departments/agencies with technical and operational 
capacities to implement urban planning
B: 0 
T: 1 (Ministry of Lands, Country Planning and Environment (MLCPE))
S: MLCPE reports
F: Annually
1.2 Capacity of ministries/departments/agencies in natural resources 
management at national and local levels strengthened to ensure 
sustainable use of environmental resources including livelihoods
1.2.1: Natural resources that are managed under a sustainable use, 
conservation, access and benefit-sharing regime:
(a) Area of land and marine habitat under protection (hectares)
Ministry of Mines and 
Mineral Resources, MAF, 
local councils, Office of 
National Security (ONS), 
MLCPE, Institute of 
Marine Biology and 
Oceanography, National 
Tourist Board, NPAA, 
EPA
GEF, United States 
Agency for International 
Development (USAID), 
European Union, JICA, 
African Development 
Bank (AfDB), Islamic 
Development Bank, 
World Bank
UNCDF, WFP, FAO, 
UN-Women, IFAD, IOM
Private sector 
organizations,
Petroleum companies, 
Telecommunication 
companies; extractive 
industries 
Regular:
$16,000,000 
Other:
$25,000,000 
Total: 
$41,000,000(b) Area of protected land under improved management (hectares)
B: (a) 40 hectares; (b) 0 hectare 
T: (a) 1,000 hectares; (b) 1,000 hectares
S: NPAA, MAF
F: Annually
1.2.2: # of people directly benefiting from livelihood opportunities created 
from conserved and protected areas at community level
B: 450 (Males: 200; Females: 250)
T: 3,000 (Males: 1,000; Females: 2,000)
S: Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD)
F: Annually
1.2.3: Extent to which disaster risk management policy developed (Scale: 
1 = Not started, 2 = Initiated, 3 = Developed, 4 = Finalized, 5 = 
Popularized)
B: 2
T: 5
S: ONS
F: Annually
1.3 Preparedness systems in place at community level to mitigate the 
impact of natural and manmade disasters
1.3.1: # of newly established climate information and early warning 
systems in place at district level
B: 9
T:19
S: Metrological Agency, EPA, ONS 
F: Annually 
1.3.2: # of community-based disaster preparedness and response plans 
designed and implemented at ward level 
B: 0
T: 100
S: MLGRD, ONS 
F: Annually 
NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL: Governance and Accountability for Results (Cluster 4); and Empowering Women, Children and persons with disabilities (Cluster 5)
UNDAF OUTCOME 2: By 2023, people in Sierra Leone benefit from more gender- and youth-responsive institutions that are innovative, accountable, and transparent at all levels and can 
better advance respect for human rights and the rule of law, equity, peaceful coexistence, and protection of children, girls, and persons with disability
UNDP Strategic Plan 2018-2021: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development (Outcome 2)
2.1: Proportion of women and 
persons with disabilities in elected 
S: NEC Ministry of Social 
Welfare, Gender and 
Regular: 
$7,800,000positions in: (1) Parliament; (2) 
local councils; (3) chairpersons; 
(4) Paramount Chieftaincy; (5) 
Councillors 
B:
Women: (1) 12.4%; (2) 18%; (3) 
28.5%; (4) 6.6%; (5) 8%
Persons with disabilities: (1) 0%; 
(2) 0%; (3) 0%; (4) 0%; (5) 0%
T:
Women: (1) 30%; (2) 50%; (3) 
50%; (4) 30%; (5) 30%.
Persons with disabilities: (1) 1%; 
(2) 1%; (3) 1%; (4) 1%; (5) 1
2.2: Mo Ibrahim Index score for 
Sierra Leone
B: 50.9 (2018)
T: 55
2.3: Proportion of the population 
who are satisfied with: (a) courts: 
(b) police; (c) prison service, 
disaggregated by sex
B: (a) 41%; (b) 37%; (c) 53%
T: (a) 55% (Males: 27%; Females: 
28%); (b) 55% (Males: 27%; 
Females: 28%); (c) 65% (Males: 
45%; Females: 20%)
2.4: Proportion of community 
people satisfied with service 
delivery by local councils, 
disaggregated by sex
B: 0%
T: 35% (Males: 17.5%; Females: 
17.5%)
F: Every electoral cycle of 
five years
R: UNDP, UN-Women
S: Mo Ibrahim report
F: Annually
R: UNDP
S: UNDP Survey report
F: Every 2-3 years
R: UNDP
S: UNDP Survey report
F: Every 2-3 years
R: UNDP 
2.1 Capacities of targeted oversight and accountability institutions 
(Parliament, HRC, NEC, ACC and IPCB) strengthened to perform 
their mandates
2.1.1: # of targeted oversight and accountability institutions with 
strengthened oversight legal framework 
B: 0 
T: 4
S: NEC, HRC, Judiciary and IPCB 
F: Annually
2.1.2: # of targeted institutions with administrative and procedural systems 
to effectively perform oversight: (a) procedures and (b) administrative 
systems
B: (a) 15; (b) 5
T: (a) 35; (b) 25
S: IPCB, HRC
F: Annually 
2.1.3: Extent to which civil register facilitates the extraction of voter 
register for efficient and credible elections (Scale: 1 = No voter extraction, 
2 = Partial extraction, 3 = Successful extraction)
B: 1
T: 3
S: Project reports, NEC, NCRA report 
 F: Annually
2.2 Rule of law institutions (Judiciary, SLP, IPCB, HRC, MOJ, are 
strengthened to uphold human rights, access to justice and security 
2.2.1: # of targeted institutions with improved procedures and processes to 
deliver justice and security services
B: 1 (Judiciary)
T: 4 (SLP, IPCB, HRC, Sierra Leone Correctional Services)
S: Justice Sector Coordination Unit, LAB 
F: Annually
2.2.2: # of cases of gender-based violence reported to authorities and # of 
reported cases receiving judgment in formal justice system 
B: 210 cases and 89 convictions 
T: 500 cases and 150 convictions 
S: Judiciary, LAB
F: Annually
2.3 Gender-responsive institutional frameworks strengthened for peace, 
citizen’s voice and participation for social cohesion
Children Affairs, 
Ministry of Internal 
Affairs, Ministry of 
Planning and Economic 
Development, Ministry of 
Information and 
Communication, 
MLGRD, NEC, HRC, 
National Civil 
Registration Authority 
(NCRA), Judiciary, 
Parliament, PPRC, 
Ministry of Justice 
(MOJ), Ministry of 
Finance, Parliament, 
IPCB, Legal Aid Board 
(LAB), Sierra Leone 
Police (SLP), Office of 
Ombudsman
European Union, Irish 
Aid, Peacebuilding Fund, 
DfID, World Bank
UNCDF, IOM, UNWomen, UNESCO, 
UNICEF
Foundations, private 
sector
Other: 
$36,000,000
Total: 
$43,000,0002.3.1: # of innovative dialogue platforms developed for inclusion and 
participation of women and youth in sustaining peace and building social 
cohesion 
B: 143 
T: 200 
S: ONS annual reports, CSO reports
F: Annually
2.3.2: # of CSOs and media institutions with improved capacity to promote 
peace at national/local levels
B: 14 (7 CSOs, 7 Media)
T: 20 (10 CSOs, 10 Media)
S: CSO reports, Media articles 
F: Annually
2.4 Capacities of targeted local councils improved to deliver on devolved 
functions and manage resources 
2.4.1: % of ministries/departments/agencies with technical capacities to 
support local councils in the devolution processes
B: 0%
T: 40% 
S: MLGRD, local councils
F: Annually
2.4.2: # of local councils with institutional and operating capacities to 
deliver on devolved functions
B: 0 
T: 22 
S: MLGRD
F: Annually
2.4.3: # of local councils that practice integrated, gender-sensitive 
participatory planning based on the 2030 Agenda
B: 6 
T: 22 
S: local council reports
F: Annually 
2.4.4: # of local councils with capacity to generate, manage, and publish 
quality date disaggregated by sex and persons with disabilities
B: 0 
T: 22 
S: reports of local councils and Statistics Sierra Leone 
F: Annually NATIONAL PRIORITY/GOAL: Diversifying the Economy (Cluster 2) and Youth Employment, Sports and Migration (Cluster 6)
UNDAF OUTCOME 4: By 2023, the most vulnerable, particularly women, youth, adolescents and children (especially girls), and persons living with disabilities are empowered and benefit 
from increased social protection services, economic and social opportunities
UNDP Strategic Plan 2018-2021: Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions (Outcome 1) and Build resilience to shocks and crises (Outcome 3)
4.1: % of population using 
renewable energy sources
B:15% (2018)
T: 44% 
4.2: Employment rate 
disaggregated by sex 
B: 62.2 (2014)
T: 70% (Males: 40%; Females: 
30%)
4.3: Gender Inequality Index 
B: 0.645 (2017)
T: 0.57
4.4: Proportion of unemployed 
who are actively seeking work that 
lacked the capital to start a 
business, disaggregated by 
vulnerable group, sex, age
B: 50%
T: 25%
S: Multiple Indicator 
Cluster 
Survey/Demographic and 
Health Survey
F: 3-5 years
R: UNDP
S: Labour Force Survey
F: 3-5 years 
R: ILO
S: Human Development 
Report
F: 3-5 years 
R: UNDP
S: Labour Force Survey
F: 3-5 years 
R: ILO 
4.1 Vulnerable groups (poor women, youth and persons with disabilities) 
are enabled to gain access to basic and financial services for business 
development and job creation 
4.1.1: # of people accessing basic services disaggregated by target groups: 
(a) Men; (b) Women; (c) Youth; (d) persons with disabilities
B: 900: (a) 0; (b) 0; (c) 0; (d) 0
T: 3,000: (a) 900; (b) 600; (c) 1,350; (d)150
S: Partner reports 
F: Annually 
4.1.2: # of small and medium-sized enterprises owned by women, youths 
and persons with disabilities accessing financial services: (a) Women; (b) 
Youth; (c) persons with disabilities
 B: (a) 382; (b) 702; (c) 61 
 T: (a) 1,125; (b) 2,070; (c) 180
S: Local Content Agency
 F: Annually 
4.1.3: # of technical, vocational education and training institutions that 
incorporate innovation and entrepreneurship skills training in their 
curricula
B: 0 
T: 4
S: National Youth Commission, Ministry of Youth Affairs
F: Annually
4.2. Households in target areas with access to energy for domestic 
consumption 
4.2.1: # of households accessing clean, affordable and renewal energy, 
disaggregated by rural/urban/peri-urban areas
B: 0
T: 5,000 (Rural: 2500; Urban: 1,000; Peri-urban: 1,500) 
S: Ministry of Energy
F: Annually
4.3. Vulnerable communities in targeted districts are enabled to harvest 
safe, clean and drinkable rainwater 
Ministry of Energy,
Ministry of Youth 
Affairs Ministry of 
Technical and Higher 
Education, Ministry of 
Water Resources 
AfDB, European Union, 
DfID, USAID, 
UNOPS, UNIDO, IOM, 
UNICEF, UNESCO
Foundations, private 
sector, academia
Regular:
$3,900,000
 
Other:
$13,500,000 
Total:
$17,400,0004.3.1: # of functioning sustainable community reservoirs with standalone 
roof-top harvesting systems
B: 0
T: 9 (3 in hospitals; 6 in schools)
S: Ministry of Water Resources
F: Annually
4.3.2: # of people benefiting from functioning sustainable community 
reservoirs with standalone roof-top harvesting systems disaggregated by 
sex and persons with disabilities 
B: 0
T: 50,000
S: Ministry of Water Resources
F: Annually
4.4 Public and private sectors institutions have improved capacities to 
create decent jobs and sustainable livelihood options
4.4.1: # of people with access to livelihood options in predefined values 
chains, disaggregated by sex and persons with disabilities
 B: 2,623 (Males: 1,442; Females: 1,181) 
 T: 6,000 (Males: 2,400; Females: 3,400; persons with disabilities: 200)
S: National livelihood support survey
F: Annually
4.4.2: Extent to which Maritime Policy implemented: a) 1 = Not 
implemented, b) 2 = Partially, c) 3 = Fully
B: 1
T: 3
S: MAF, Partner reports
 F: Annually 
1.5 Grassroots innovative solutions identified with local actors (youth, 
women, community people) to address development challenges 
4.5.1: # of innovative solutions: (a) identified; (b) piloted; (c) scaled up
B: (a) 0; (b) 0; (c) 0
T: (a) 40; (b) 15; (c) 8
S: Partner reports
F: Annually 