File Name: SOM-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Somalia
Country Code: SOM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1 to 4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
8 December 2020
Original: English
2016684X (E) 141220
First regular session 2021
1 to 4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Somalia (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Somalia (2021-2025) 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. The UNDP country programme document (CPD), 2021-2025, is designed to support the efforts 
of Somalia to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals as articulated in the National 
Development Plan, 2020-2024 (NDP-9). The CPD is aligned with the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) in content, structure and timelines. UNDP coleads three of the four UNSDCF pillar working groups. 
2. The NDP-9 identifies four pillars and defines roadmaps for inclusive politics, security and justice,
and economic development, against which CPD programme priorities are aligned. The NDP-9 is 
considered the country’s interim poverty reduction strategy paper (PRSP) and, alongside other key 
requirements, has led to Somalia reaching its decision point under the Heavily Indebted Poor 
Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
3. The country’s socioeconomic transformation is occurring within a challenging national context,
characterized by a contested political environment, conflict and instability, and complex regional 
politics, including rivalry among clans, which has largely destroyed the country´s infrastructure and 
institutions and led to continued insecurity, insurgency and violation of human rights, with women 
largely excluded from peacebuilding processes owing to structural constraints and male-dominated 
political systems.
1 Some parts of the country and roads are under the control of terrorist groups/Al 
Shabab.
2 Given its location within the Horn of Africa, events in Somalia have security, economic, 
trade, social and environmental implications for neighbouring countries.
4. After more than two decades of civil war and conflict, Somalia has made progress towards 
political and security stabilization. The establishment of the Federal Government of Somalia in 
2012, the first national elections in 2016 and the provisional constitution have provided 
opportunities for stability, peace, security and sustainable development.
3 Despite progress, Somalia
remains a fragile state and faces various challenges in efforts to achieve the Sustainable 
Development Goals.4
5. Growing at an average of 2.5 per cent in 2012-2019, the economy is susceptible to multiple 
shocks,5including recurrent floods and droughts and, most recently, locust infestation, exacerbated 
by limited capacities of government institutions to deliver services, inadequate infrastructure, and 
frailties in the public financial management system.6 The country’s fragility has been further 
compounded by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has impacted economic growth, food security, 
employment, remittances and fiscal revenue.7
6. More than 5.2 million people in Somalia, mostly pastoralists and agro-pastoralists, need 
humanitarian assistance due to the multiple shocks; 2.6 million have been displaced due to conflicts 
and climate-related emergencies.8 Some 877,000 Somali refugees live in neighbouring countries, 
making them one of the largest refugee populations in the world.9 This has exposed people, 
especially women, youth, persons with disabilities and internally displaced persons (IDPs), to 
increased sexual and gender-based violence, food insecurity, loss of livelihood and economic
insecurity.
10 While progress is being made to strengthen the investment climate, there is an absence 
1 UNDP, 2019. “Measuring the economic impact of violent extremism leading to terrorism in Africa” (2007-2016), Ibrahim Index of 
African Governance (IIAG) International, 2007-2017.
2 Felbab-Brown, Vanda. “Developments in Somalia” (14 November 2018): Brookings Institute and “Somalia: A Political Economy 
Analysis” (22 June 2018): Norwegian Institute of International Affairs.
3 Felbab-Brown, Vanda. “Developments in Somalia” (14 November 2018): Brookings Institute.
4 Federal Government of Somalia. 2019. Somalia National Development Plan, 2020-2021; World Bank. 2019. Somalia Poverty and 
Vulnerability Assessment (Findings from Wave 2 of Somalia High Frequency Survey; Federal Republic of Somalia. 2018; Somalia 
Recovery and Resilience Framework; FGS. 2018. Somalia Drought Impact and Needs Assessment (DINA), Volume II: Sector Reports; 
World Bank. 2017. “Strengthening Somalia´s Systems Smartly: A Country System Risk Benefit Analysis”. 
5 World Bank, 2019. “Somalia Economic Update: Building Education to Boost Human Capital”, August, Edition No.4.
6 Federal Republic of Somalia. 2018. Somalia Recovery and Resilience Framework.
7 RAAGSAN. May 2020. “Socioeconomic implication of COVID-19 on micro, small and medium women-owned enterprises: A case 
of Mogadishu”.
8 United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan Somalia.
9 United States for UNHCR. 2020. Somalia Refugee Crisis Explained (www.unrefugees.org).
10 OCHA
January 2020Humanitarian Response Plan SomaliaHumanitarian programme cycle 2020of adequate policies and regulatory frameworks to promote private sector development, domestic 
and foreign investment, and regional trade.11
7. The Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment, 2017-2018, indicates that 77 per cent of the 
country’s population12 live below the poverty line ($1.90 per capita/day).
13 Poverty incidence is 
highest (more than 80 per cent) in the north, south-west and in some districts of Mudug and 
Galguduud. Households located in IDP settlements and urban areas have the highest incidence of 
poverty at 75.6 and 73.7 per cent, respectively.14
8. Women represent nearly half the population and head five out of ten households.
15 Womenheaded households have poverty incidence six percentage points higher (72 per cent) than those 
headed by men (66 per cent). The Somalia Health and Demographic Survey 2020 showed that only 
9 per cent of ever-married women were employed at survey time, while 18 per cent were not paid 
for work. Somali women are engaged in the informal sector and micro-enterprises, agricultural 
production and livestock activities.16 Women comprise over 60 per cent of business owners, the 
majority being micro-enterprises. COVID-19 has exacerbated the vulnerability of women in smallscale business, reducing their income and destroying livelihoods.
17 Poor access to finance (86.9 per 
cent), dwindling sales (38.9 per cent), inability to benefit from government tax relief (87.7 per cent), 
and reduced remittances (90 per cent) are obstacles to women’s entrepreneurial development.18
9. Young people aged under 35 and 24 comprise about 75 per cent and 63 per cent, respectively, of 
the country’s estimated population of 15 million.
19 The Somalia Youth Assessment Report indicates 
that two out of three youth (aged 15 to 30) live in poverty with food insecurity.20 More than half of 
Somali youth are illiterate; two out of three have no formal education or have dropped out of school 
and 73 per cent are unemployed (42 per cent male; 58 per cent female).21 High youth unemployment 
is a threat to inclusive prosperity, stability and security, with male youth likely to be recruited into 
violent extremist organizations and girls forced into early marriage and experiencing sexual and 
gender-based violence, which affects one out of four women in Somalia; 99 per cent of Somali 
women aged 15 to 49 have undergone circumcision.
22
10. Recurrent disasters, climate emergencies, and unsustainable exploitation of natural resources,
combined with weak environmental governance, have resulted in degradation of the natural resource 
base.
23 The 2016-2017 drought plunged the majority of the population into food insecurity, with an 
estimated 6.7 million people acutely food insecure at the drought’s peak.24 The 2018 Somalia 
Drought Impact and Needs Assessment showed there had been over $3 billion (over 50 per cent of 
annual gross domestic product (GDP) in drought-related damages and losses. Multi-sectoral 
recovery and resilience-building needs were estimated at nearly $1.8 billion.25 Food insecurity, 
11 World Bank. 2019. Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings from Wave 2 of Somalia High Frequency Survey; 
Federal Republic of Somalia. 2018; National Development Plan, 2020-2024.
12 Approximately 82.2 per cent of the population is multidimensionally poor and about 8.7 per cent are vulnerable to poverty (source: 
https://ophi.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/CB_SOM_2018.pdf).
13 World Bank. 2019. Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings of Wave 2 of Somali High Frequency Survey; Somalia 
National Development Plan, 2020-2024.
14 World Bank, Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Report 2019 (http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/3181).
15 World Bank. 2019. Somalia Poverty and Vulnerability Assessment: Findings of Wave 2 of Somali High Frequency Survey; Somalia 
National Development Plan, 2020-2024.
16 Ministry of Women and Human Rights. 2020. Rapid Assessment of Impact of COVID-19 on Somali Women Leading Small-scale 
 Businesses. 
17 A study of socioeconomic implications of COVID-19 on micro, small and medium women-owned enterprises in Mogadishu showed 
that 43 per cent of businesses had to stop operations while 98 per cent registered decreased revenue/sales: RAAGSA, May 2020.
18RAAGSAN. May 2020. “Socioeconomic implication of COVID-19 on micro, small and medium women-owned enterprises: A case 
of Mogadishu”.
19 Somalia population is estimated at over 15 million, 49.9 per cent are male and 50.1 per cent, female. About 46 per cent of the 
population consists of children aged 0 to 14. UNFPA, Population estimation survey report, 2014; common country assessment, 2020.
20 USAID. 2020, Somalia Youth Assessment.
21 Ministry of Youth and Sport. June 2017. The National Youth Policy of the Federal Government of Somalia; Youth Strategy for 
Somalia, 2016-2020; United Nations-Somalia Youth Engagement and Empowerment. May 2019. 
22 Federal Republic of Somalia: Somalia Health and Demographic Survey, 2020.
23 In terms of climate vulnerability, Somalia ranks highest among fragile states (https://www.climatediplomacy.org/publications/infographic-countries-receiving-unpbf-funding-and-their-climate-vulnerability) and second among 191 
countries with limited risk management capacities in the 2019 Global Risk Index (ND-GAIN index: University of Notre Dame 
(https://gain.nd.edu/our-work/country-index/).
24 World Bank. 2018. Somalia Drought Impact and Needs Assessment, 2018, Vol.2.
25 Federal Republic of Somalia
2018Somalia Recovery and Resilience Framework Report2018scarcity of drinking water, and displacement contributed to a stark rise in malnutrition and waterborne diseases, all a source of conflict.26
11. Amid these challenges, opportunities exist in the political, economic, social and environmental 
fronts that serve as CPD entry points. Somalia has ratified various international human rights
instruments27 and developed several policy and legal frameworks.
28 The refinement of aid 
coordination structures provides an opportunity for the country’s continued positive trajectory.
12. The UNDP country office in Somalia is a trusted partner and convenor for governmental and 
non-governmental actors, able to facilitate community and citizen engagement, and is impartial in 
addressing sensitive issues, such as human rights and gender inequalities. Given these comparative 
advantages, UNDP will work with government at federal, state and local levels, civil society 
organizations (CSOs), the private sector, the United Nations system and other development partners,
in supporting national efforts to address these challenges. 
13. Aligned to the UNSDCF theory of change,
29 the CPD is based on the logic that transformative 
and inclusive politics and reconciliation, including deepening the federalization process and 
establishing a constitution, are preconditions for realizing sustained security, ensuring access to 
justice and rule of law, attaining inclusive economic recovery, and building resilience in a 
sustainably managed environment for the people’s benefit.
14. The CPD is informed by lessons learned from previous programming periods, the independent 
country programme evaluation 2019, and sector-specific plans. UNDP will build on successes 
collectively realized in support of key national processes on elections, federalism, community 
engagement, women’s role in peace and security, economic recovery, and natural resource 
management. UNDP will adopt strategies, such as capacity development, and area-based and joint 
programming modalities, to deliver the CPD. Successful innovation pilots generated through the 
UNDP accelerator lab will inform programme design and implementation. 
II. Programme priorities and partnership
15. The CPD, 2021-2025, was developed through an inclusive, consultative process.
30 The 
programme is guided by the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the six signature 
solutions31 of the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, and will be realigned to the forthcoming 
strategic plan. 
16. The CPD will contribute to national development priorities through three interlinked 
development results: (a) effective governance, inclusive politics and reconciliation; (b) enhanced 
security, rule of law and access to justice; and (c) sustainable management of natural resources for 
inclusive economic growth. These will be achieved through integrated programming approaches: 
26 Presentation on acute water diarrhoea to the humanitarian country team (4 August 20): Cholera cases in Somalia: regional and district 
analysis.
27 Some of the international human rights conventions ratified by Somalia include the International Convention on the Elimination of 
All Forms of Racial Discrimination; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights; the International Covenant on the Rights of the Child; and the International Covenant on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities amongst others.
28 Legal and policy frameworks include the New Policing Model (2016); the National Security Policy Somalia (2016); the National 
Reconciliation Framework (2019); the National Anti-corruption Strategy (2020-2023); the National Strategy for Preventing and 
Countering Violent Extremism (2017); the National Youth Policy; the Somalia Recovery and Resilience Framework (2018); and the 
Somali Women’s Convention on the Role and Participation of Women in Peace and Security (2019) amongst others.
29 The UNSDCF theory of change is based on the logic that inclusive, democratic politics and reconciliation are preconditions for 
sustained security, rule of law and building strong institutions in the Federal Government of Somalia, the Federal Member States and 
local government in order to deliver services, which in turn is a driver for economic recovery, shared prosperity, social transformation 
and adaptation to climate change.
30 As part of CPD development, the country office undertook a survey among stakeholders, including the Federal Government of 
Somalia, Federal Member States, local government, donors, CSOs, youth organizations, women organizations and the private sector, 
and internally among UNDP staff to identify CPD priorities and UNDP comparative advantages. In addition, the partners undertook an 
e-review of the draft CPD and participated in a series of virtual consultations jointly organized with the coordinating ministry (Ministry 
of Planning, Investment and Economic Development) to validate the draft.
31 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021 (Signature solutions: 1. Keep people out of poverty; 2. Strengthen effective, inclusive and 
accountable governance for peaceful, just and inclusive societies; 3. Enhance national prevention and recovery capacities for resilience 
societies; 4. Promote nature-based solutions for sustainable planet and development; 5. Close energy gap: clean, affordable energy; and 
6Strengthen gender equality and empowerment of women and girls)sustainable capacity development, the humanitarian-development-peace nexus, coherent policy 
support, conflict sensitive programming, and strategic partnerships, including through joint 
programmes with United Nations entities. To ensure inclusivity and leaving-no-one-behind, the 
CPD will adopt a human rights-based approach and mainstream gender and women’s empowerment 
and environmental sustainability. 
17. UNDP will partner with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), the African 
Union, and the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to address cross-border/transboundary issues in the Horn of Africa, security, political, environmental and economic aspects 
within their mandates. South-South and triangular cooperation will be adopted to promote 
innovative approaches as strategies for enhancing economic growth and addressing insecurity. The 
programme will strengthen engagement with citizens through participatory planning at district level. 
UNDP will utilize existing national and United Nations structures and work with national and 
subnational-level partners, including government, private sector, civil society and international 
financial institutions to deliver CPD priorities.
Programme priority 1: governance, inclusive politics and reconciliation
18. This programme will contribute to Goals 5, 10, 16 and 17 and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021,
signature solutions 2, 3 and 632 and UNSDCF outcome 1.2. UNDP will:
(a) Support development and implementation of relevant policy, legal and regulatory frameworks 
in line with international and regional norms and standards; establish and strengthen effective 
and accountable institutions in national, state and local governments to deliver quality services 
to citizens and tackle corruption and mismanagement of public resources;
(b) Work with relevant institutions to review, adopt and implement the Somalia constitution; 
harmonize Federal Member States constitutions and legislative frameworks, including uptake 
of the Women´s Charter with the federal constitution;
(c) Support effective implementation of the national reconciliation framework/process 
(NRF/NRP); strengthen capacity of religious and traditional leaders, CSOs, women, youth,
IDPs and persons with disabilities to effectively participate/engage in conflict mapping and 
peacebuilding initiatives;
33
(d) Support the Federal Government of Somalia, Federal Member States, local government, 
electoral management institutions, CSOs, religious and traditional leaders in completing policy, 
legal and regulatory frameworks on inclusive and credible elections, and election and political 
party laws; strengthen capacities of institutions in charge of elections; empower women, youth,
IDPs and persons with disabilities to actively participate in elections at all levels; and work with 
CSOs and media to safeguard democratic space;
(e) Work with relevant United Nations entities – the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia 
(UNSOM), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
(UN-Women) and the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC) – and local 
authorities to overcome obstacles to achieving results; deploy adaptive management 
methodology in response to the dynamic political context, with the support of possible funding 
partners such as the United Kingdom Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office
(FCDO), the European Union, Denmark, Germany, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the 
Peace Building Fund.
32 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2020 (Signature solutions: 2. Strengthen effective, inclusive and accountable governance for peaceful, 
just, and inclusive societies; 3. Enhance national prevention and recovery capacities for resilient societies; and 6. Strengthen gender 
equality and empowerment of women and girls).
33 In line with various United Nations resolutions, including: (a) Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on Women, Peace and Security; 
(b) Security Council resolution 2250 (2015) on Youth, Peace and Security; (c) General Assembly resolution 72/182 on the Protection 
of and Assistance to Internally Displaced Persons; and (4) Security Council resolution 2475 (2019) on Protecting Persons with 
Disabilities in ConflictProgramme priority 2: security, rule of law and access to justice 
19. This programme will contribute to Goals 5, 10, 16 and 17 and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, 
signature solutions 2, 3 and 634 and UNSDCF outcome 2.1. UNDP will:
(a) Support implementation plan of the National Security Architecture and coordination of the 
comprehensive approach to security; support implementation of the Somalia Transition Plan 
through institutional strengthening and increased professionalism for security sector 
governance; promote civilian oversight functions of the security sector with increased 
involvement of civil society and the media; and support climate justice and security;
(b) Build communities’ capacities to conduct generative dialogue on justice issues, support 
restorative and transformative justice and address underlying power dynamics at the root causes 
of violence and conflict; support establishment of and capacity building for the Human Rights 
Commission and the Judicial Services Commission; institutionalize alternative dispute 
resolution mechanisms; advocate for ratification of human rights conventions, including the 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW); 
and protect women, girls, IDPs and persons with disabilities from human rights violations and 
sexual and gender-based violence;
(c) Support non-violent alternatives to conflict resolution to facilitate peace and counter violent 
extremism, including a focus on community-led processes and empowering religious leaders, 
clan elders, youth and women in support of the national tolerance and dialogue strategy;
(d) Work with United Nations entities (UNSOM, UN-Women, the United Nations Children’s Fund 
and UNOPS) in line with the global focal points mechanism to facilitate and ensure 
marginalized groups, including women, youth, IDPs and persons with disabilities, participate 
in and benefit from reforms in security, rule of law, access to justice and human rights, with 
possible funding partners such as the European Union, the Netherlands, Denmark, FCDO, 
Germany, Japan, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and the Peacebuilding Fund.
Programme priority 3: sustainable natural resources management for inclusive economic 
growth
20. This programme will contribute to Goals 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17, 
and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, signature solutions 1, 3, 4, 5 and 635 and UNSDCF
outcomes 3.1 and 4.2. Specifically, UNDP will: 
(a) Support integrated environmental governance and natural resources management, including 
land, water, marine and restoration of degraded landscapes and ecosystems; facilitate 
vulnerable communities (women, youth, agro-pastoralists, IDPs) to participate and benefit from 
these initiatives;
(b) Support development of policies that improve resilience to climate change and increase disaster 
risk management capacities at federal, state and local levels; build resilience for pastoralists and 
agro-pastoral communities; establish end-to-end early warning systems to inform sustainable 
mitigation measures for emergencies;
(c) Support development of legal and regulatory frameworks for private sector and digital skills 
development, especially among youth, and participatory processes to create green jobs for 
youth, women, IDPs and persons with disabilities; promote innovative businesses in key 
sectors, including blue, green and grey economies; contribute towards economic recovery and 
diversification and increased market access; and support the Federal Government of Somalia 
and Federal Member States in planning and data generation to promote inclusive economic 
growth;
34UNDP Strategic Plan 2018-2020 (Signature solutions: 2. Strengthen effective, inclusive and accountable governance for peaceful, just, 
and inclusive societies; 3. Enhance national prevention and recovery capacities for resilient societies; and 6. Strengthen gender equality 
and empowerment of women and girls).
35 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-20 (Signature Solutions: 1. Keep people out of poverty; 3. Enhance national prevention and recovery 
capacities for resilient societies; 4. Promote nature-based solutions for sustainable planet and development; 5. Close energy gap: clean, 
affordable energy; and 6Strengthen gender equality and empowerment of women and girls)(d) Support development of legal frameworks to regulate cost of energy and improve equitable 
access to sustainable energy sources for vulnerable communities, including female-headed 
households in partnership with the private sector;
(e) Work with Federal Government of Somalia and Federal Member States to promote durable 
solutions for IDPs, bringing together humanitarian-development-peace approaches and the 
adoption of international and regional frameworks to promote stabilization, resilience and
livelihood opportunities;
(f) As the globally mandated technical lead, work with the country team to implement the United 
Nations framework for the immediate socioeconomic response to COVID-19, as informed by 
the pandemic impact assessment, in partnership with the United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Human 
Settlements Programme, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, the 
International Labour Organization, the International Organization for Migration, private sector 
institutions, the World Bank, African Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, and 
funding partners: FCDO, Italy, Japan, the United States Agency for International Development 
(USAID), Switzerland, Sweden, the Adaptation Fund, the Global Environment Facility and 
Green Climate Fund. 
III. Programme and risk management
21. This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit of 
accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme 
at country level. Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and headquarters levels, with 
respect to country programmes, are prescribed in the programme and operations policies and 
procedures and internal control framework.
22. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The 
harmonized approach to cash transfers (HACT) will be used in coordination with United Nations
organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to concerned projects.
23. Political risks. To address the risk of divisive, sectarian politics, UNDP will continue to partner 
with UNSOM, AMISOM and other regional and international partners to facilitate continuous 
dialogue with and among the Federal Government of Somalia, Federal Member States, 
religious/local leaders and other stakeholders to strengthen federalization, promote reconciliation 
and enhance inclusion. Accountability frameworks defining roles and responsibilities of different 
partners will be adopted to mitigate against the impact of political risks on programming.
24. Resource mobilization risks. Protracted insecurities, climate shocks and COVID-19 continue to 
direct financial resources towards humanitarian needs. The Partnership and Communication Action 
Plan (PCAP) is underway and will identify alternative resource mobilization approaches and move 
from funding to financing, using the HIPC initiative as entry point. The PCAP will serve to engage 
with traditional and emerging donors to promote long-term development solutions.
25. Implementation and operational risks. Security risks continue to hamper programme 
implementation and increase costs. To mitigate risks, UNDP will strengthen security measures and 
continue to streamline operations and adjust its in-country presence in accordance with security 
developments and in line with agreements within the United Nations system. The country office 
will maintain its presence in Mogadishu and in state capitals in Somalia, with a liaison office in 
Nairobi, Kenya. 
26. The country office will continue to work with the United Nations Risk Management Unit to
assess, monitor and mitigate programmatic and operational risks based on ISO13000 risk 
management standards. UNDP will unify its efforts with the United Nations system to implement 
joint risk mitigation measures in consultation with partners. 27. Due to national partners’ limited capacities in programme management, UNDP will use direct 
implementation. Through implementation of the business operations strategy with other United 
Nations organizations, the country office will support a macro-assessment of the public financial 
management system to inform use of national systems. Programme governance mechanisms will be 
established in alignment with UNSDCF structures for management and oversight. Opportunities for 
systematic capacity development will be jointly pursued with United Nations organizations, 
including, as applicable, using HACT.
28. To enhance efficiency, the programme will streamline business operations and enhance 
coordination and synergies across projects and portfolios.
29. Social and environmental standards. The country office will apply UNDP social and 
environmental screening procedures and accountability mechanisms as part of risk management and 
do-no-harm principles.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
30. UNDP county programme monitoring, evaluation and reporting will be aligned to the UNSDCF 
2021-2025 monitoring and evaluation plan. The country office will develop an evaluation plan that 
includes project and thematic evaluations for the three programme priorities and, with the Resident 
Coordinator’s Office, a joint UNSDCF evaluation.
31. Monitoring and evaluation in Somalia is a challenge, owing to insecurity and inaccessibility of 
some areas. Joint United Nations third-party monitoring services will be deployed and innovation 
tools for data management adopted to ensure a robust monitoring system that will inform 
adjustments during programme implementation.
32. Working with the Department of Statistics, relevant bilateral and multilateral partners, UNDP 
will support strengthening of institutions and systems for gender and age-disaggregated data
management at federal and state levels, in line with the national statistics strategic plan.Annex. Results and resources framework for Somalia (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP 9 Pillar 1. Inclusive and accountable politics and reconciliation.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: UNSDCF outcome 1.2. Somalis, particularly women and youth, benefit from and participate in functional, inclusive, accountable and 
transparent democratic systems across all levels of government and governmental institutions.
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS/ 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME
(United States dollars)
Indicators
Proportion of seats held by women in:
(a) Federal Parliament (b) Federal 
Member States parliaments 
Baseline: 24.5% Federal Parliament 
(2020)
Federal Member States parliaments:
1.5% (Puntland), 15.8% (South West), 
10.8% (Jubaland), 6.7% (Galmudug), 
6.1% (Hirshabelle) (2020)
Target: 30% women quota 
Data source: Federal and Member 
States parliaments and CSO reports
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: UNDP, UNSOM
Output 1.1. Legal and regulatory frameworks 
for citizen participation in political processes 
developed 
Indicators:
1.1.1: Number of legal and regulatory frameworks 
aligned to international and regional 
standards/human rights conventions
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2
Source: Parliaments 
Frequency: As applicable
1.1.2: Women, youth, persons with disabilities 
and IDPs actively engage in political processes 
Baseline: Limited engagement 
Target: Significant engagement
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: As applicable
Federal Government of 
Somalia, Federal Member 
States, Federal and State 
parliaments, local 
governments, CSOs, 
religious/traditional leaders, 
the Electoral Commission, 
United Nations, donors, 
Somali people 
Regular: $15 million
Other: $79.9 million
Output 1.2. Provisional Constitution reviewed 
and adopted 
Indicators:
1.2.1: Constitution adopted 
Baseline: Provisional Constitution 
Target: Reviewed Constitution
Source: Joint Parliamentary Oversight 
Committee
Frequency: As applicable1.2.2: Institutionalization of article 3(v) in the 
reviewed Constitution
Baseline: Not institutionalized (2020) 
Target: Institutionalized 
Source: Joint Parliamentary Oversight Committee
Frequency: As applicable
Output 1.3. Federalist governance model 
strengthened and National Reconciliation 
Framework (NRF) implemented
Indicators:
1.3.1: Extent to which federal governance 
architecture for peace and security is functional 
Baseline: Draft Intergovernmental Relations Bill 
(2020)
Target: Bill approved and implemented
Source: Ministry of Interior, Federal Affairs and 
Reconciliation
Frequency: As applicable
1.3.2: Extent of implementation of the NRF 
Baseline: 0% 
Target: 50% 
Source: Project reports
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.4. Strengthened electoral institutions 
and systems for credible federal elections 
Indicators 
1.4.1: Proportion of voter turnout by elective 
category and electoral levels (youth, persons with 
disabilities) disaggregated by sex 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 50% turnout of registered voters
Source: National Independent Election 
Commission (NIEC)
Frequency: As applicable
1.4.2: Proportion of women in elected positions 
Baseline: 24% (2020)Target: 30%
Source: NIEC, parliaments
Frequency: As applicable
Output 1.5. Institutions at national, state and 
local government levels strengthened to deliver 
quality services to citizens
Indicators 
1.5.1: Number of institutions/districts capacitated 
Baseline: 17 (2020) 
Target: 41 (4 per Federal Member State)
Source: project reports
Frequency: Annual
1.5.2 Level of citizen engagement in local level 
development processes
Baseline: Limited
Target: Significant
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP-9 Pillar 2. Improved security and the rule of law.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2. UNSDCF Outcome 2.1. Respect, protection and promotion of human rights, gender equality, tolerance, climate security and 
environmental governance would be sustained by strengthened Security and Rule of Law institutions and improved accountability mechanisms and legal frameworks.
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicators
2. Proportion of the population 
who have experienced a dispute 
in the past two years and who 
accessed a formal or informal 
dispute resolution mechanism, 
by type of mechanism and 
disaggregated by gender and 
displacement status
Baseline: 39% accessed clan elders; 
8% religious leaders; 3% informal court; 
Data source and frequency
Source: World Bank High Frequency 
Survey
Frequency: Biennial 
Responsibility: World Bank, UNDP
Output 2.1. Capacity of security institutions 
strengthened to ensure service delivery in line 
with the Somalia Transition Plan and National 
Security Architecture, and compliance with 
human rights due diligence policy (HRDDP)
standards
Indicators 
2.1.1. Number of institutional development and 
capacity building plans developed/updated and 
implemented
Baseline: 13 (2020) 
Target: 16 
Source: UNSOM
Security, police, justice and 
human rights institutions
the Federal Government 
and Member States, CSOs, 
media, religious/traditional 
leaders, United Nations, 
donors, Somali people 
Regular: $12 million
Other: $90 million45% police; 2.5% formal court; 
2.8% community leaders
Target: Increased trust in formal justice 
institutions
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.2. Strengthened capacity of 
institutions at federal and state levels to 
promote restorative and alternative justice 
systems 
Indicators 
2.2.1: Progress towards establishment of Human 
Rights Commission 
Baseline: Limited progress 
Target: Significant progress 
Source: Federal Government of Somalia, 
UNSOM reports 
Frequency: Annual
2.2.2: Number of CSOs capacitated to report on 
human rights violations 
Baseline: 13 
Target: 40 
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
2.2.3: Number of community-based dispute 
resolutions mechanisms established/capacitated to 
deliver justice services 
Baseline: 16 alternative dispute resolution centres 
in 5 FMS, Benadir (2020)
Target: Additional 2 per state
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.3. Capacity of women, youth, persons
with disabilities and IDPs strengthened to 
access justice services 
Indicators
2.3.1: Proportion of marginalized population 
accessing justice services 
Baseline: No data (2020)
Target: 20% increase 
Source: Third-party monitoringFrequency: Annual
2.3.2: Proportion of sexual and gender-based 
violence victims accessing formal justice system
Baseline: No data
Target: 60% 
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.4. Enhanced peace and security 
through tolerance and dialogue 
Indicators 
2.4.1: Number of community/religious leaders’ 
networks and prevention and countering of violent 
extremism (PCVE) platforms established and 
capacitated 
Baseline: 6 (1 Federal level religious leaders’
network; 5 PCVE platforms at state level)
Target: 25 (10 religious leaders’ networks; 
15 PCVE platforms)
Source: Project reports
Frequency: Annual 
2.4.2: Number of grievances successfully mediated 
by the networks and platforms
Baseline: 4 
Target: 60
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.5: Legal and regulatory frameworks 
for climate security developed and 
implemented
Indicators
2.5.1: Number of policies enacted and 
implemented
Baseline: 2
Target: 4 
Source: Project report
Frequency: Annual2.5.2: Percentage reduction of climate-related 
security incidences in target areas
Baseline: To be determined 
Target: Five-point reduction per target area 
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP-9 Pillar 3. Economic development.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3. UNSDCF Outcome 3.1. Economic governance institutions are strengthened, and an enabling environment established for inclusive, 
sustainable and broad-based economic growth driven by the emerging small and medium enterprise (SME) sector.
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
Indicators
'Doing Business' global ranking
Baseline: Rank 190 out of 190 countries 
Target: Rank at least 150 
Data source and frequency
Source: World Bank
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: World Bank
Output 3.1. Capacity of governmental 
organizations strengthened for effective 
regulatory oversight of productive sectors 
(blue, green, grey economies) 
Indicators
3.1.1: Number of policies, legal and regulatory
frameworks developed/revised to meet 
international standards
Baseline:10 (2020)
Target: 30 
Source: Project report
Frequency: Annual
3.1.2: Proportion of SMEs reporting improved 
business environment
Baseline: 0% (2020)
Target: 60%
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Federal and state 
government entities, private 
sector, investors, 
academia/think tanks; target 
communities, UN, donors, 
Somali people (including 
the diaspora)
Regular: $24.2 million
Other: $27 million
Output 3.2. Enhanced access of SMEs to 
business development services (BDS)
Indicators
3.2.1: Number of enterprises receiving BDS 
disaggregated by sector
Baseline: 1 (2020)
Target: 10 per stateSource: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
3.2.2: Number of women, youth and persons with 
disabilities–owned enterprises capacitated
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 10 per category
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 3.3 Enhanced access to clean, 
affordable and sustainable energy for economic 
growth
Indicators
3.3.1: Number of households benefitting from 
clean, affordable and sustainable energy access, 
by category (women, pastoralists, IDPs)
Baseline: 58,682 households (86% women headed 
households) (2020)
Target: 350,000 households (90% women headed 
households)
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
3.3.2: Number of legal and regulatory frameworks 
on energy developed and implemented 
Baseline: 5 (2020)
Target: 10
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: As applicable
3.3.3 Number of clean energy systems 
Baseline: 9 (2020)
Target: 15
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 3.4. Strengthened national capacities 
for planning and data generation for inclusive 
economic growth Indicators:
3.4.1: Number of Federal Member States 
development plans finalized and implemented
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 6
Source: Project report
Frequency: Annual
3.4.2: Extent of implementation of national 
statistics strategic plan 
Baseline: 0
Target: 90%
Source: Project report
Frequency: As applicable 
3.4.3: Number of institutions strengthened for 
effective programme management 
Baseline: 25 (2020)
Target: 100
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 3.5. Expedited digital economy 
application for target groups 
Indicators:
3.5.1: Increase of service sector (as proxy for a digital economy) contribution to GDP
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2% annual increase 
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
3.5.2: Number of youths trained on digital literacy 
Baseline: 100 (2020)
Target: 10,000
Source: Project reports
Frequency: Annual
3.5.3: Number of private sector entities employing 
youths
Baseline: No data (2020)Target: Additional 6 
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 3.6. Durable Solutions for IDPs are 
implemented for stabilization, livelihoods and 
peace 
Indicators:
3.6.1: Number of IDPs benefitting from 
livelihoods initiatives
Baseline: 23,557 (2020)
Target: 250,000
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
3.6.2: Number of IDPs/returnees reintegrated 
Baseline: 4,398 (2020)
Target: 10,000
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP-9 Pillar 4. Social development.
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4. UNSDCF Outcome 4.2. Number of people impacted by climate change, natural disasters and environmental degradation reduced.
RELATED UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Outcome 3. Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises.
Indicators
Number/proportion of people impacted by 
climate change, natural disasters and 
environmental degradation.
Baseline: 50% of population (2020)
Target: 20%
Data Source and frequency:
Source: OCHA/ReliefWeb
Frequency: As applicable
Responsibility: OCHA/humanitarian 
country team
Output 4.1. Enhanced capacities of government 
institutions and communities at federal, state, 
local levels to mitigate and adapt to climate 
change
Indicators: 
4.1.1: Number of target communities benefitting 
from early warning systems
Baseline: 100,000 agro-pastoralists (2020)
Target: 1,000,000 agro-pastoralists
Source: Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster 
Management Agency (HAMDA); Third-party 
monitoring
Institutions at FGS and 
FMS, CSOs, Media, 
traditional leaders, United 
Nations, private sector, 
target communities
Regular: $15 million
Other: $42.6 million4.1.2: Number of sectoral institutions engaged in 
the implementation of the nationally determined 
contributions to climate change 
Baseline: 5 at federal level (2020) 
Target: 11 (6 atstate/local levels)
Source: Third-party monitoring
Frequency: Annual
Output 4.2. People-centred environment and 
climate-smart strategies established for 
sustainable natural resources management
Indicators:
4.2.1: Number of policies and legal frameworks 
developed and implemented at federal and state 
levels, disaggregated by sector 
Baseline: 5 (2020) 
Target: 9 
Source: project reports
Frequency: Annual
4.2.2: Number of target groups (pastoralists, agro-
pastoralists, fishermen) benefitting from natural 
resources management initiatives 
Baseline: 53,320 (42% women) (2020)
Target: 100,000 (50% women) 
Source:Project reports
Frequency: Annual
Output 4.3.Institutions at federal and state 
levels adapting and implementing disaster risk 
management systems in line with Sendai 
Framework
Indicators
4.3.1: Number of institutions adopting and 
implementing disaster risk reduction strategies 
Baseline: 3 early warning systems operational in 
Federal Government of Somalia, Somaliland and Puntland (2020)
Target: 32 (7 at state level; 25 at local level) 
Source: Disaster Management authorities Frequency: Annual
4.3.2: Proportion of target groups/communities 
adopting DRR measures
Baseline: 25% (2020)
Target: 80% 
Source: Source: Disaster management authorities 
Frequency: Annual