File Name: SRB-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Serbia
Country Code: SRB
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
20 July 2020
Original: English
2009862X (E) 290720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Serbia (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 6
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Serbia (2021-2025) 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. The Republic of Serbia is a landlocked country situated at the crossroads of Central and 
South-Eastern Europe. The country has passed through a period of many changes, managing 
a rapidly evolving political and economic situation. Today Serbia is a candidate country for 
membership in the European Union.
2. Since the negotiations started in 2013, 18 of 35 European Union acquis chapters have 
been opened and two preliminarily closed, on science and research and on education and 
culture. UNDP supported the opening of chapters on public procurement and on financial 
control. 
3. The Serbian economy is largely dominated by market forces, with a significant state 
sector presence in certain areas, such as energy. The country benefits primarily from 
proximity to the European Union and a cost-competitive and skilled labour force. Serbia has 
enjoyed five consecutive years of annual gross domestic product growth of 3-4 per cent. A 
reduction in public sector spending, labour-market flexibility and improved business 
regulations were among factors contributing to the positive trend.
1 Growth was accompanied 
by a fall in unemployment, which reached a record low of 9.7 per cent in 2019 (9.1 per cent
for men and 10.3 per cent for women).
2
4. However, statistics on unemployment are clouded by the growing number of men and 
women, particularly the young, leaving the country. Better educational opportunities, larger 
labour markets with better workplace choices and higher salaries, potentially leading to 
professional fulfilment and a better quality of life for the next generation, are some of their
reasons for leaving. From 2007 to 2016, the number of men and women migrating from 
Serbia to the European Union and other highly developed countries has been increasing 
continually, from 27,000 to 60,000 per year.
3 Women are more mobile than men, with rates 
of 56 per cent and 44 per cent respectively. Although there are no official data on the total 
number of the Serbian diaspora and Serbs in the region, the earlier estimates put the number 
at more than 5 million.
4
5. The population of 6.9 million5is projected to fall to 5.8 million by 2050, which at 23.8
per cent is the most extreme decline in the Western Balkans.
6 The total fertility rate of 1.5, 
significantly below the replacement level of 2.1 children per woman, and low immigration
to Serbia are changing the age structure of the population. Serbia in the twenty-first century 
is going to have fewer, older people and a more female population. Rural parts of the country 
will be sparsely populated, while people will concentrate in a few major cities. In 2020, the 
Government adopted the Strategy on Economic Migration covering the period 2021-2027,
7
with a goal to create an economic and social environment conducive to slowing the 
emigration of the working-age population; to strengthen ties with the diaspora, encourage 
return and circular migration; and to attract foreign nationals of various professional 
backgrounds to the country.
6. Some of the root causes of the demographic decline are found in inequalities, which are 
among the highest in Europe. Many of them – in gender, education, income – overlap, 
leaving some people behind. Adjusted for inequality, the high Human Development Index 
of 0.799 of Serbia falls to 0.685, an overall loss of 14.4 per cent. Gender inequality is 
pervasive despite a solid legal framework that protects women’s rights. Women’s 
1 https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/serbia/publication/serbia-new-growth-agenda
2 https://www.stat.gov.rs/en-US/
3 https://www.oecd.org/migration/international-migration-outlook-1999124x.htm
4 http://mfa.rs/sr/index.php/konzularni-poslovi/dijaspora/dijaspora-opste?lang=cyr
5 https://www.stat.gov.rs/
6 https://sdgintegration.undp.org/countries/serbia
7 https://www
srbijagovrs/vest/en/150705/government-adopts-economic-migration-strategyphpparticipation in the labour market is relatively low at 46.8 per cent, compared to 62.1 per 
cent for men.
8 The role of women in decision-making is modest, with only 14.3 per cent of 
companies employing female top managers. The only positive trend is observed in women’s 
representation in the Parliament, currently at 34.7 per cent and with prospects for an increase 
to 40 per cent after the 2020 elections, due to electoral gender quotas.
9 Women are paid 8.7
per cent less than men for the same work. Serbia has only a moderate score on gender parity 
in tech roles and women account for only 20.3 per cent of graduates of tertiary-level science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics programmes. Other forms of inequalities are 
emerging, such as the digital divide. In tech jobs, women continue to earn less than men 
despite their higher overall educational achievements.10
7. UNDP has been leading efforts to establish mechanisms for the integrated response to 
violence against women at the local level and changed the way the theme is presented in 
public discourse.
11 To that end, UNDP set up the network of Female Journalists against 
Violence, which brought about a paradigm shift in the media’s role in addressing the topic. 
The number of convicted perpetrators is increasing, with 2.974 persons convicted in 2018, 
30.5 per cent more than in 2016.
12 Other institutional response indicators are also on a 
positive trajectory: in 2019, 47,583 reported cases were processed compared to 44,886 in 
2018 and 17,300 cases were confirmed by the courts compared to 15,617 in 2018.
13
8. More than one third of the population (34.3 per cent, or 2.4 million people) is at risk of 
poverty or social exclusion. People living in households composed of two adults with three 
or more dependent children are at the greatest risk of poverty (53.6 per cent), followed by 
people living in single-person households (37.2 per cent) and youth aged 18-24 years (29.1
per cent). Women account for 60 per cent of single-person households. 14
9. The Roma continue to be one of the most vulnerable groups in society. Just over one fifth 
of Roma were employed in 2017 and only one third participated in the labour market. Only 
9 per cent of Roma women are employed. Rates of not being in education, employment or 
training for young Roma are very high, at 73 per cent for men and 88 per cent for women.
15
Scaling-up of the pilot initiatives on capacitating young Roma women and men to develop, 
implement and monitor Roma inclusion policies and increase their employment will 
continue to be central to the work of UNDP and of the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Volunteers programme. 
10. Development analytics on Serbia show the complexity of governance-related 
challenges.16 UNDP was advised to pay more attention to the rule of law, public participation 
and media freedoms in the next country programme.17
11. Serbia ranks first in Europe and ninth in the world for pollution-related deaths.
18 As 80
per cent of greenhouse gas emissions come from energy production and consumption, further 
harmonization with European Union policies and practices will be required to meet the goals
of a 9 per cent reduction in final energy consumption, 27 per cent of renewables in gross 
final energy consumption and improved air quality. UNDP supported the construction of
combined heat and power plants on biomass with installed capacity of 6.35 megawatts. The 
plants increased the share of renewables in gross final energy consumption by 130 per cent
and will reduce 1.04 megatons of carbon dioxide-equivalent emissions during the next 20
8 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2019.pdf
9 https://www.weforum.org/reports/gender-gap-2020-report-100-years-pay-equality
10 http://publicpolicy.rs/publikacije/961581c6008514f57a7635bbdf8c7bc1cbe24fea.pdf
11 Independent country programme evaluation, 2019.
12 https://www.stat.gov.rs/en-US/
13 Ibid.
14 Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia (SILC, 2018) https://publikacije.stat.gov.rs/G2019/PdfE/G20191281.pdf
15 https://www.eurasia.undp.org/content/rbec/en/home/library/roma/regional-roma-survey-2017-country-fact-sheets.html
16 https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood-enlargement/sites/near/files/20190529-serbia-report.pdf
17 Independent country programme evaluation, 2019.
18 http://www.ansamed.info/nuova_europa/en/news/countries/serbia/2020/01/10/serbia-ranks-first-in-europe-for-pollution-related-deaths_815e8c60-
615a-4a24-9507-732ee2b82940htmlyears. The added value of UNDP was its ability to attract investments from commercial 
banks, with earnings generated exceeding the anticipated costs, jobs created and an increased 
tax base.
19
12. The first case of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Serbia was reported on 6 March 
2020. The Government has introduced containment and mitigation measures to slow the 
spread of the virus. The United Nations Country Team (UNCT) developed a country 
preparedness and response plan with a focus on preventing further transmission and 
supporting the clinical and life-saving activities led by the Government. After the epidemic 
has slowed, the UNCT will undertake a socioeconomic impact assessment which will form 
the basis for a “build back better” recovery strategy.
13. Using the portfolio approach to achieve multiplier effects throughout the programme, 
UNDP will respond to three strategic priorities of the United Nations Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF).
Strategic priority 1: Serbia harnesses the full potential of a green, sustainable and 
inclusive economy
14. The UNDP integration offer will include innovation and thematic expertise around 
renewables and energy efficiency challenges, in line with the Government’s plans to provide 
safe, affordable and clean energy to its citizens,
20 as well as raising the national ambition to 
combat climate change and increasing resilience to natural and human-induced risks. This 
will entail the creation of partnership platforms with the Government and international 
stakeholders with whom UNDP has been successfully cooperating in the past, and with 
citizens. UNDP will draw resources from the Global Environment Facility, Green Climate 
Fund and other vertical funds, and further leverage government financing, development 
loans and private investment into environment- and climate-friendly initiatives. UNDP will 
work with the UNCT to build on the momentum of increased public concerns due to the high 
air pollution and COVID-19 and will look into opportunities to finance investments to 
implement a European Green Deal21 in Serbia, including a circular economy, resource 
efficiency, European Union green commodity chains and the disaster financing and the civil 
protection requirements of the acquis chapter 27 on environment.
15. UNDP will promote nature-based solutions to climate change adaptation and mitigation, 
which are essential for tackling multiple developmental challenges, be they climate crisis, 
inequality and poverty, insecurity and/or migration. The portfolios will target policymakers,
institutions at national and local levels and citizens. They will range from awareness-raising, 
activism and advocacy to policy support, access to finance, creation of green technological 
solutions and promotion of forward-looking, resilient and resource-efficient approaches in
response to COVID-19. Bearing in mind that climate change affects men and women 
differently and that women should be a part of the solutions, the portfolios will support 
integration of gender dimensions in national climate policies.
Strategic priority 2: Well-being, social equity and human potential are at the heart of 
systems, policies and practices
16. UNDP will identify initiatives to address the depopulation challenge, in line with the 
Government’s Strategy on Economic Migration 2021-2027. A portfolio of interventions 
around selected areas will be developed and opportunities explored to establish a funding 
mechanism, together with the International Labour Organization, United Nations Population 
Fund, other United Nations agencies and the Resident Coordinator. These interventions will 
benefit from the capacities gained through the Sustainable Development Goal integration 
pilot and the UNDP Accelerator Lab and Innovation Facility. The Accelerator Lab will take 
the lead in designing a portfolio of integrated solutions that support the positioning of Serbia 
19 https://erc.undp.org/evaluation/documents/detail/13675
20 http://www.evropa.gov.rs/Documents/Home/DACU/12/74/NAD%202014-2017%20with%20projections%20until%202020%20(english).pdf
21 https://ec
europaeu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-dealenas a leader in thinking around issues of how to proactively plan for and manage demographic 
change and population decline. Building on untapped human and social capital potential, 
portfolios will link with the diaspora outside Serbia, integrate the gender dimension and
include Roma, older populations and youth. The Accelerator Lab will work with the Resident 
Coordinator’s office and UNCT to design an integrated early recovery portfolio in response 
to the COVID-19 crisis. The aim is to make the businesses and labour market more inclusive
and resilient by brokering new partnerships, developing innovative employment and 
financing modalities and accelerating progress under the acquis chapter 19 on social policy 
and employment.
Strategic priority 3: Building trust and mutual accountability through the rule of law, 
rights and duties agenda
17. UNDP will pursue a portfolio of interventions to improve the transparency, 
accountability and efficiency of public institutions at central and local levels, supporting the 
creation of high-quality services for citizens and businesses, and a public administration that 
enhances economic stability and living standards.
22 Drawing on lessons from the previous 
programme, UNDP will concentrate on increasing the efficiency of governance and on 
citizens’ participation. The work on the quality of regulation and rule of law will be carried 
out in close collaboration with development partners, such as the European Union, the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the United States Agency for International 
Development. UNDP plans to further support the strengthening of capacities for the 
absorption of external financial assistance in line with the acquis chapter 22 on structural 
instruments and regional policy. Using the innovation and information and communication 
technology capacities of the Accelerator Lab, UNDP will support the country to take 
advantage of digital transformation, including in its public administration and health system,
and will mainstream digital technology across its interventions, to respond to the disruptions 
of COVID-19, combat the digital divide and ensure equal opportunities for all.
18. UNDP engagement will support implementation of the reforms required for European 
Union accession, which are closely aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals. The 
strengths of UNDP lie in its capability to unpack complex development challenges, test 
solutions and design a portfolio of interventions to address different facets of a problem. In 
these endeavours, UNDP relies on diversified partnerships with the Government, civil 
society, academia, the research community, private sector and international actors and is
backed by efficient institutional and operational set-ups. For this reason, UNDP has been 
recognized as a trusted partner and convener, supporting national implementation of 
international conventions and compliance with the European Union acquis. The 
Government's readiness to fund development interventions through UNDP reflects its strong 
appreciation of the existing partnership.
23
19. The Government's national machinery for the Sustainable Development Goals can be 
strengthened. The Government supports the complementarity of European Union accession 
and the Goals but can do more to translate these synergies into practice by localizing the 
Goals. UNDP will safeguard United Nations core values, identify synergies for greater 
impact and deliver tangible support in implementing the UNSDCF. UNDP will pursue the 
unifying principle of leaving no one behind, particularly targeting women, youth and Roma.
The Office of the President of Serbia will be capacitated to assist the President to promote
the progress and launch a national programme of action on the Goals. The Government will 
be supported to leverage private and innovative finances and investments for the Goals, such 
as social impact bonds for decent work and economic growth or green bonds for climate 
action and nature conservation.
22 https://media.srbija.gov.rs/medsrp/dokumenti/ekspoze-mandatarke-ane-brnabic280617_cyr.pdf
23 Independent country programme evaluation
2019II. Programme priorities and partnerships
20. Within this context, the country programme will be guided by national priorities, the 
UNSDCF, UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, European Union accession and the Decade of 
Action for the Goals. It builds on results achieved to date and lessons learned from evidencebased performance analysis while also anticipating new areas of intervention. The vision and 
theory of change have been developed in consultation with citizens, civil society 
organizations, the private sector, innovation ecosystem actors, UNDP and United Nations
staff, national and local governments, development partners and international financial 
institutions operating in Serbia. 
21. The scope of the programme reflects multi-stakeholder concerns and aspirations
intertwined with the UNDP value proposition. The approach is focused on pursuing humancentred development along three development pathways and delivering results in four of 
nine UNSDCF outcome areas. The overarching programmatic vision is that Serbia is a safe 
and free country with accountable government which uses national resources for the wellbeing and prosperity of all its boys, girls, men and women, and is a country people want to 
live in. 
22. The pathway leading to more accountable institutions and empowered citizens is 
built on the mix of strategies that assume the Government’s commitment to more efficiently 
pursue the European Union accession processes, fully respecting democratic principles. In 
order to address the underlying causes of problems, UNDP will strengthen national and local 
mechanisms and capacities for good governance. Support will entail working on genderresponsive capacity development of public services and institutions, especially on the 
implementation of national and local development strategies. The aim is to address capacity 
gaps and link planning with implementation in different sectors including labour, 
employment, public finance, procurement, environment, disaster risk reduction, energy and 
water management. Since the digital transformation of public administration and the 
economy is high on the Government’s agenda, UNDP will work to build the position of 
Serbia as a regional digital development hub through implementation of the existing strategic 
framework that includes the development of e-government and artificial intelligence
strategies and laws, and mainstream the digital transformation in early and long-term 
COVID-19 recovery plans. By the same token, increasing citizens’ representation and civic 
engagement will translate into the extension of opportunities for democratic dialogue,
including the work with the Parliament to install more citizen-centric rules of procedure and
strengthen its oversight function over the Executive. UNDP will provide initial support for 
creation of the official development assistance system.
23. The pathway to inclusive innovation for development and decent work 
opportunities will entail initiatives that facilitate local development and untap human 
capital potential. It assumes the Government’s commitment to systemically adapt to and 
pursue the fourth industrial revolution for all and apply better-targeted labour-market
activation measures to reduce inequalities and support access to essential goods and services 
for vulnerable households affected by COVID-19. UNDP will seek solutions that allow
greater learning, work and career opportunities for men and women, including the age 50+ 
generation, more tangible support to implementation of Roma inclusion policies and more 
gender-responsive services. Mobility and demographic transition will be treated as vectors 
of positive change through the retention of the skilled workforce, inclusion of the diaspora 
in redefining the future of Serbia and creation of an industry revolving around ageing. A 
package of legislative changes incentivizing research and development and financing of tech 
start-ups will be used for the expansion of the innovation ecosystem and sustainable 
business. UNDP will support the Government in implementing information technology reskilling programmes and will prevent further deepening of the digital divide by ensuring the 
equal participation of women and persons with disabilities. UNDP will increase its capacity 
to tap into private sector partnerships and innovative financing mechanisms. This work will lead to potential investments in the circular economy, aiming to close the loop in the area of 
biowaste reduction. A blockchain-based food surplus distribution platform developed in 
house will be finalized and upscaled for the whole food chain. Other potential avenues for 
boosting and future-proofing small and medium-size enterprises, through access to finance 
and technology, will be explored as well as how to engage the private sector in advancing 
gender equality and removing the structural barriers to women’s economic empowerment.
UNDP will support the Government of Serbia’s objective to develop an effective, 
accountable and transparent means to align its international cooperation with countries with 
the Sustainable Development Goals, the European Union and global procurement standards, 
and Serbian development priorities.
24. The pathway leading to strengthening resilience for current and future generations
will be guided by aspirations to mitigate and adapt to climate change, disaster and health 
risks and to raise the country’s ambitions related to climate, nature protection, conservation 
and sustainable use of natural resources. UNDP will support Serbia to adopt a 
comprehensive legal framework for climate change, consistent with the European Union
2030 framework for climate and energy policies. This will include the adoption of the draft 
Law on Climate Change and the Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan, which will 
determine the direction of low-carbon development and the road map for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions through specific mitigation measures. Adaptation of key 
economic sectors to climate change, primarily agriculture, water management, forests and 
natural resources, will be supported. The work on development of a comprehensive climate 
monitoring, reporting and verification system will be pursued as will the preparation of the 
national greenhouse gas inventory and a plan to adapt to the effects of climate change. UNDP 
will ensure that gender equality is embedded in the revised nationally determined 
contribution for Serbia and will further support the authorities to address the genderdifferentiated impacts of climate change and disasters and the negative socioeconomic 
effects of COVID-19. In supporting community-led resilience and response systems, UNDP 
will continue working with the individuals, companies and institutions that are best at
identifying innovative solutions. Opportunities will be explored to work with the European 
Union on financing investments within the Green Deal agenda targeting energy efficiency, 
clean energy and waste-related interventions. The disaster risk reduction and climate change 
nexus will be addressed to prevent environmental degradation, improve water management
and strengthen the resilience of communities. UNDP will continue supporting the 
participation of the Republic of Serbia in regional initiatives in South-Eastern Europe.
25. Established synergies should guarantee the design and delivery of integrated solutions 
and multiplier effects. UNDP will widen and deepen its partnership base aimed at higher 
involvement of non-traditional partners such as the Government of the Russian Federation, 
the Visegrád Group countries and international financial institutions to accelerate
institutional and societal changes. The convening role of UNDP will add value in building 
and nurturing the non-financing partnerships with citizens and grass-roots civil society 
organizations. Regular consultations with stakeholders will ensure national ownership and 
engagement, help validate suitability of interventions and inform adaptive management.
III. Programme and risk management
26. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are
prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and 
internal control framework.
27. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
28. UNDP will contribute to UNSDCF implementation through assigned roles within three 
strategic areas and four outcomes. UNDP will chair and participate in the work of relevant 
results groups.
29. The government coordinating agency will be the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and other 
national and subnational authorities will be implementing partners. The key principles of 
programme management will include formulation, implementation, monitoring, reporting 
and cost sharing of projects.
30. The UNSDCF Steering Committee will oversee the progress, as informed by the results 
groups composed of national counterparts and United Nations agencies. Project boards will 
be established for each project. In relation to international partners, UNDP, as part of the 
United Nations system, will participate in the country-level development partners’ 
coordination mechanism, led by the Ministry of European Integration. The GovernmentUNDP Council will perform the role of the Local Project Appraisal Committee.
31. UNDP will, when appropriate, use diverse programming instruments for the effective 
delivery of results, such as the engagement facility, development services and memorandums 
for provision of services in addition to standard development projects. 
32. UNDP will provide implementation support services at the request of the Government 
and will pursue innovative contractual engagement with responsible parties such as 
performance-based payments and innovation awards, in addition to low-value grants. 
33. Social and environmental sustainability are fundamental to the achievement of all 
programme outcomes and will be fully integrated into the projects and social and 
environmental standards, and a social and environmental screening procedure will be put in 
place. Accountability will be ensured through the stakeholder response mechanism and the 
compliance review process, through which any person or community who believes the 
environment or their well-being may be affected by a UNDP-supported project or 
programme may file a complaint.
34. The country office will set out management strategies for mitigating the primary risks 
such as ensuring that the increase in decent jobs and social innovation benefit equally men 
and women, strive for citizens’ active engagement in development of the country and further 
build the institutional adaptation and resilience capacities for future shocks. UNDP will 
institute transparent and compliant processes, closely monitor media and news and ensure 
proper external communication to address operational risks and continue looking for entry 
points to achieve transformational change. 
35. UNDP will pursue horizontal programme actions and a portfolio-based approach to 
avoid fragmentation of the programme. The approach to partnerships and resource 
mobilization will be designed to meet the country programme resource estimates and will be 
tailored to the country’s higher middle-income status. To this end, UNDP will continue to 
explore partnership with the development banks, such as European Investment Bank, World 
Bank, Council of Europe Development Bank and European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development to help in blending public and private financing for the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Success in partnerships and resource mobilization is essential for the 
implementation of the programme in the medium and long term. Resources entrusted to UNDP by the Government for project and programme implementation are expected to 
constitute an important part of the country programme resource envelope.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. The quality of the country programme interventions will be assessed by applying quality 
standards to identify strengths and weaknesses and to inform management decisions. 
Progress towards development goals and outcomes will be regularly checked by collecting 
and analysing gender-sensitive and sex-desegregated data against the results indicators. 
Information will be periodically updated in a centralized programme/project database and a 
solid monitoring and evaluation framework, linked to the Sustainable Development Goals, 
will be created to enable systemic data collection and evaluability of the country programme. 
37. Following the recommendations of the evaluation of the development partnership 
framework, UNDP will encourage civil society and the media to play a more critical role in 
monitoring the country’s reforms and will work on raising the Government’s capacities to 
monitor, aid knowledge-gathering and improve performance. The country programme focus 
on digitalization and innovation is expected to assist national partners to open as many data
sets as possible and measure developmental changes in key sectors. The quality of national 
data is good, and UNDP will work with the Statistical Office to improve the use of existing 
databases for tracking the Sustainable Development Goals through the national platform. 
38. UNDP will pursue evaluations for accountability and learning. Knowledge, good 
practices and lessons learned from national and international sources will be used in shaping
policy advice, advocacy, project design and implementation. Emphasis will be put on 
national ownership and capacity development in evaluations, through closer involvement of 
government counterparts in the process and exposure to evaluation networks and events. Annex. Results and resources framework for Serbia (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: To create the high-quality services for citizens and businesses, and the public administration that will significantly contribute to economic stability and 
improved living standard of citizens (Public Administration Reform Strategy)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: All people benefit from effective governance and meaningful civic engagement
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY24 OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
1. Government Effectiveness Estimate
Baseline: 0.11 (2018)
Target: 0.45 (2025)
2. Corruption Perceptions Index value
Baseline: 39 (2019)
Target: 50 (2025)
3. Proportion of population satisfied 
with efficiency of administrative 
procedures in public institutions
Baseline: 51% (2018)
Target: 60% (2025)
1. World Bank
2. Transparency International, 
3. Support for Improvement in Governance 
and Management (SIGMA)
4. National Assembly Report
5. eGovernment Benchmark report
Output 1.1: National and local 
mechanisms and capacities for good 
governance improved
Indicative Indicator 1.1.1: Open Budget 
Index value
Baseline: 43 (2017)
Target: 60 (2025)
Indicative Indicator 1.1.2: Professional 
development and training for civil 
servants’ indicator value 
Baseline: 3 (2018)
Target: 4 (2025)
Indicative Indicator 1.1.3: Quality of 
policy planning ranking
Baseline: 1 (2018)
Target: 3 (2025)
Output 1.2: Citizens’ representation 
and civic engagement for the benefit 
of society and environment enhanced
Indicative Indicator 1.2.1: share of 
local self-governments that publish 
information of some hearing or debate 
Baseline: 60% (2019)
Target: 70% (2025)
National Assembly of the 
Republic of Serbia
Government of Serbia
Office of the President of 
the Republic of Serbia
Ministry of Finance
Ministry of Public 
Administration and Local 
Self-Government
Ministry of Justice
Ministry for European 
Integration
Public Policy Secretariat
Ministry of Trade and 
Telecommunications
Office for Information 
Technology and EGovernment
National Academy for 
Public Administration 
Public Procurement 
Office
State Audit Institution 
Commissioner for the 
Protection of Personal 
Data and Free Access to 
Information
Local Self-Governments
Standing Conference of 
Towns and Municipalities
Office for Cooperation 
with Civil Society 
Regular
$539,000
Other
$31,465,000
24 Frequency is annual if not indicated otherwiseIndicative Indicator 1.2.2: Number of 
public hearings conducted by the 
Parliament
Baseline: 6 (2019)
Target: 30 (2025)
Output 1.3: Digital transformation of 
public administration accelerated
Indicative Indicator 1.3.1: User 
centricity of eGovernment services 
score
Baseline: 68 (2018)
Target: 74 (2025)
Indicative Indicator 1.3.2: Accessibility 
of public services indicator value
Baseline: 3 (2019)
Target: 4 (2025)
Civil Society 
Organizations 
Academia
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhanced human capital that ensures prosperity, well-being and cohesion of Serbian society (National Priorities for International Assistance); Enhancing 
multisectoral cooperation and strengthen the capacities of institutions to address gender-based violence (National Strategy for Combating Gender-Based Violence)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: Equitable economic and employment opportunities are promoted through innovation and 
circularity
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
1. Ease of Doing Business score
Baseline: 75.7 (2020)
Target: 76.5 (2025)
2. Employment rate aged 15-64 years
disaggregated by sex
Baseline 60.7% (2019) 
Men: 67.1% 
Women: 54.3% 
Target: 72.50% (2025)
Men: 74% 
Women: 70% 
3. Global Gender Gap Index
Baseline: 0.736 (2020)
Target: 0.740 (2025)
1. World Bank
2. Statistical Office of the Republic of Serbia 
3. World Economic Forum
5. UNDP reports
Output 2.1: Measures to improve 
local development strengthened
Indicative Indicator 2.1.1: Number of 
investment initiatives supported
Baseline: 24 (2019)
Target: 40 (2025)
Output 2.2: Women and men have 
better access to social services and 
greater learning, work and career 
opportunities
Indicative Indicator 2.2.1: Number of 
people trained in skills in demand 
Baseline: 420 (2019)
Target: 1,300 (2025) 
(70% men;30% women)
Ministry of Public 
Administration and Local 
Self-Government
Public Investment 
Management Office
Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology
Ministry of Interior
Regular
$539,000
Other
$16,000,0004. Youth Not in Education, 
Employment, or Training (NEET) rate 
Baseline: (2019) 
Men 14.8%
Women 15.8%
Roma men 73 %
Roma women 88 %
Target: (2025)
Men 10%
Women 12%
Roma men 50 %
Roma women 70 %
Indicative Indicator 2.2.2: Proportion of 
gender-based violence cases judged
Baseline: 37.5% (2019)
Target: 50% (2025)
Indicative Indicator 2.2.3: Science, 
technology, engineering, and 
mathematics (STEM) attainment of 
women 
Baseline: 20.3% (2020)
Target:30% (2025)
Output 2.3: Innovation ecosystem, 
sustainable business and investment 
improved 
Indicative Indicator 2.3.1: Business 
start-up and early trading operations 
score
Baseline: 68 (2018)
Target: 73 (2025)
Indicative Indicator 2.3.2: Number of 
supported projects in circular economy
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 5 (2025)
Frequency: Biennially
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhanced climate actions, building resilience to climate change impacts, natural and man-made disasters and improved capacity for disaster risk reduction and 
management; Serbia provides safe, affordable and clean energy to its citizens (National Priorities for International Assistance)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: Serbia adopts and implements climate change and environmentally friendly strategies that 
increase community resilience, decrease carbon footprint and boost the benefits of national investments
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
1. Total primary energy supply per 
capita 
Baseline: 2.27 (2017)
Target: 2.41 (2025)
2. Quantities of greenhouse gas 
emissions 
Baseline: 57,023 kiloton CO2-equivalent 
(2010)
1. Energy Balance / Energy Sector 
Development Strategy of the Republic of 
Serbia with the projections up to 2030 (target 
for 2025) 
2. Reports to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change for the 
Republic of Serbia; Report on 
implementation of the National Climate 
Change Strategy with the Action Plan, Report 
on implementation of Nationally Determined 
Output 3.1: Climate change 
mitigation and adaptation measures 
designed and implemented, and 
climate ambition raised
Indicative Indicator 3.1.1: Number of 
prepared environmental reports that 
integrate gender 
Baseline: 4 (2019)
Target: 9 (2025)
Ministry of Interior
Ministry of 
Environmental Protection 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water 
Management
Ministry of Mining and 
Energy
Ministry of Construction, 
Transport and 
Infrastructure 
Regular
$539,000
Other
$32,494,695Target: as per the National Climate 
Change Strategy with the Action Plan (to 
be adopted) (2025)
3. Number of local Disaster Risk 
Reduction assessments and protection 
and rescue plans approved 
Baseline: 76 (2019)
Target: 130 (2025)
4. COVID-19 socioeconomic impact 
assessment conducted (Yes/No)
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes (2021)
Contributions under the Paris Climate 
Agreement, 
3. National Risk Register and Risk Mitigation 
Plans, 
4. Public Investment Management Office 
Indicative Indicator 3.1.2: National 
monitoring, reporting and verification 
system established (Yes/No)
Baseline: No (2019)
Target: Yes (2025)
Indicative Indicator 3.1.3: Number of 
sectoral climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures, integrating 
gender, developed
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 5 (2025)
Output 3.2: Energy efficiency and 
share of renewables increased
Indicative Indicator 3.2.1: Maximum 
primary energy consumption which 
shall not be exceeded
Baseline: 15.931 million tons of oil 
equivalent (2017)
Target: TBD (2025)
Indicative Indicator 3.2.2: Share of 
renewable energy sources in gross final 
consumption 
Baseline: 20.6 % (2017)
Target: TBD (2025)
Output 3.3: Natural and humaninduced risks effectively addressed
Indicative Indicator 3.3.1: Number of 
capacitated civil protection units on 
national and local level, including 
women
Baseline: 550 (2019)
Target: 1,540 (2025)
Indicative Indicator 3.3.2: Improved 
regulatory framework for the custody 
chain established (Yes/No)
Agency for 
Environmental Protection 
Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry 
Standing Conference of 
Towns and Municipalities 
National Association for 
Local Economic 
Development
Serbian Innovation fund 
Swedish International 
Development Agency 
GIZ
Commissariat for 
Refugees and Migration
Minister without Portfolio 
responsible for Population 
Policy 
Public Investment 
Management Office 
City of Belgrade
Municipalities
Civil Society 
Organizations 
AcademiaBaseline: No (2019)
Target: Yes (2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Slowing down the immigration and attracting the qualified workforce from abroad, with the goal of achieving the faster economic growth and overall 
sustainable development. (Strategy on economic migrations 2021-2027)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: Mobility and demographic transition become vectors for positive change and prosperity for all 
people
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
1. Portfolio of measures related to 
adaptable human capital (COVID-2019, 
depopulation)- level of achievement
Baseline: Low (designed) (2020)
Target: High (implemented) (2025)
1. Ministry of Labour Employment, Veterans 
and Social Affairs, annually
2. Migration Councils Reports
Output 4.1: Human capital for 
accelerated development enhanced
Indicative Indicator 4.1.1: TBD from 
the Economic Migration Strategy 
Action Plan (2021-2023) 
Baseline: TBD (2020)
Target: TBD (2025)
Output 4.2: Migration management 
improved 
Indicative indicator 4.2.1: Number of 
Councils for Migration implementing 
migration and development policies
Baseline: 0 (2019)
Target: 40 (2025)
Ministry of Labour 
Employment, Veterans 
and Social Affairs
Ministry of Interior
Ministry of 
Environmental Protection 
Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry 
National Association for 
Local Economic 
Development
Serbian Innovation fund 
Commissariat for 
Refugees and Migration
Minister without Portfolio 
responsible for Population 
Policy 
Municipalities
Civil Society 
Organizations 
Academia
International Organization 
for Migration
United Nations Population 
Fund
Regular
$539,000
Other
$10,000,000