File Name: STP-CPD-2023-EN
Year: 2023
Country Name: Sao Tome & Principe
Country Code: STP
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 7–10 February 2023
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Economic and Social Council Distr.: Limited
3 January 2023
Original: English
English, French and Spanish only
For decision
United Nations Children’s Fund
Executive Board
First regular session 2023
7–10 February 2023
Item 4 (a) of the provisional agenda*
Country programme document
Sao Tome and Principe
Summary
The country programme document (CPD) for Sao Tome and Principe is 
presented to the Executive Board for discussion and approval at the present session, 
on a no-objection basis. The CPD includes a proposed aggregate indicative budget of 
$4,315,000 from regular resources, subject to the availability of funds, and $6,200,000 
in other resources, subject to the availability of specific-purpose contributions, for the 
period 2023 to 2027.
* E/ICEF/2023/1.Programme rationale 
1. Sao Tome and Principe is a small island developing State with a gross national 
income of $552 million in 2021.
1 The country’s population was 219,078 in 2022,2
with children and adolescents aged 0–19 years accounting for approximately 41 per 
cent. 
2. As a lower-middle-income country with a fragile economy, Sao Tome and 
Principe is highly vulnerable to external shocks and has a strong dependence on 
international aid, which represented 19 per cent of gross national income in 2020.3
Economic growth in the past 10 years has averaged around 4.1 per cent. In 2020, 
despite the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, growth was boosted by 
international aid, reaching 3.1 per cent but decreasing to 1.8 per cent in 2021, 
according to the International Monetary Fund. 
3. The country has made important progress in terms of social development and,
as a result, its Human Development Index score rose from 0.56 to 0.62 between 2010 
and 2019. Nevertheless, the economy has not generated enough jobs and the 
unemployment rate increased from 13 per cent in 2019 to 20 per cent in 2020. Almost 
half of the population (47 per cent) lives in extreme poverty.4
4. Between 2000 and 2020, infant and under-5 mortality decreased steadily (by 
77 per cent and 80 per cent, respectively). In 2020, the mortality rate per 1,000 live 
births was 12.7 for infants and 16.1 for children under 5 years of age.
5 This can be 
explained by the increased availability of skilled health workers and improved 
coverage of public health-care facilities.
6 Nonetheless, continuous investment must 
be made to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 3.
5. Immunization coverage is high and, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, 81 per
cent of children aged 12–23 months received all age-appropriate vaccinations. 
However, low coverage among poor or marginalized groups threatens this progress. 
In 2019, children in the poorest households (69 per cent) were least likely to have 
received all basic vaccinations, compared with children from the richest households 
(85 per cent).
7
6. In 2021, the country recorded only 41 new cases of HIV, corresponding to a 
rate of 0.2 per 1,000 inhabitants, a decrease of about 29 per cent compared with the
1 World Bank, “GNI (current US$) – Sao Tome and Principe”. Accessed on 21 October 2022. 
Available at https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.MKTP.CD?locations=ST.
2 National Institute of Statistics (Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE)), Demographic 
Projections of S. Tome and Principe on the 2035 Horizon (updated based on the results of the 
2012 Census). 
3 World Bank, “Net ODA received (% of GNI)”. Available at 
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/DT.ODA.ODAT.GN.ZS.
4 National Institute of Statistics (Instituto Nacional de Estatística (INE)), Survey on Family 
Budgets 2017, 2020. Available at https://ine.st/index.php/publicacao/documentos/file/601-
inquerito-aos-orcamentos-familiares-iof2017.
5 United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), “Under-five mortality”. Available at 
https://data.unicef.org/topic/child-survival/under-five-mortality/. 
6 World Bank, “Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total) – Sao Tome and Principe”,
available at https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.STA.BRTC.ZS?locations=ST.
7 UNICEF, “Just Released: Sao Tome and Principe 2019 Datasets And Survey Findings”, 4 
ilblh//iif/i//previous year.
8 However, only 30 per cent of girls and 28 per cent of boys aged 15–
19 years have a comprehensive knowledge of HIV transmission.
9
7. Teenage pregnancy is high, at 91 births per 1,000 in 2019,
10
 close to the
average adolescent birth rate in sub-Saharan Africa. Teenage pregnancy is often a 
consequence of the challenges that adolescents face in accessing adolescent-friendly 
health services.
8. The proportion of underweight children under the age of 5 years decreased 
from 9 per cent to 5 per cent between 2014 and 2019. However, in 2020, 8.4 per cent
of under-5 children in the poorest households were underweight, compared with 3.4
per cent of children in the richest households. Similarly, the proportion of children 
under the age of 5 years with stunting decreased from 17 per cent to 12 per cent
between 2014 and 2019, but it remained highly prevalent among children in the 
poorest households (16.3 per cent) compared with children in the richest households
(6.9 per cent).
11
9. Access to primary education remained high, with 93 per cent of children of 
primary school age in primary education and a completion rate of 87 per cent in 
2019.
12
 While enrolment in primary school is high and inclusive, access to early 
childhood education is not. In 2019, only 50 per cent of children aged 3–4 years were 
enrolled in pre-primary. Children in the richest households (57 per cent) are three 
times more likely to attend pre-primary than children in the poorest households (19 
per cent). There are also inequities in access to lower and upper secondary schools. 
Only 40 per cent of adolescents from the poorest households attend lower secondary,
compared with 73 per cent of adolescents from the richest households.
10. Quality education poses a significant challenge at all levels. In 2019, only 38 
per cent of children aged 7–14 years had the minimum/basic foundational reading 
skills, with 36 per cent having the minimum basic numeracy skills.
13 In the poorest 
households, 76 per cent of children do not have these minimum foundational skills. 
The combination of high repetition and dropout rates is reflected in an increased
number of out-of-school children. The out-of-school rate rises from 1 per cent at age 
11 years to 25 per cent at age 17. Such negative trends can be explained by fewer and
inadequate schools in rural and poorer regions, indirect costs to families, high studentto-teacher ratios, insufficient teacher training and limited alternative education 
programmes.
14
11. Important steps have been taken to improve the Government’s capacity to 
prevent, and respond to, violence against children. UNICEF has supported the 
Government in implementing an approach with both social and behaviour change 
components, and to establish a multisectoral case management system. However, 
there need to be:
(a) Improvements in the implementation of the national policy framework on 
child protection;
(b) More qualified and motivated social workers;
8
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV and AIDS, “Sao Tome and Principe 2021, HIV and 
AIDS Estimates”. Available at 
www.unaids.org/en/regionscountries/countries/saotomeandprincipe.
9
“Sao Tome and Principe 2019 Datasets”.
10 World Bank, “Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15–19) – Sao Tome and 
Principe”. Available at https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.ADO.TFRT?locations=ST.
11
“Sao Tome and Principe 2019 Datasets”.
12 Ibid.
13 Ibid.
14 
lhldd id ii(blihd (c) A strong multisectoral coordination mechanism across health, social 
welfare, justice and related sectors.
12. Violence is widespread. In 2019, 84 per cent of children aged 1–14 years
experienced violent discipline, with 14 per cent of them experiencing severe physical 
punishment.
15
 Negative social norms and gender inequality may perpetuate some 
types of violence. Notably, 18 per cent of women and 11 per cent of men aged 15–49 
years believed that it is acceptable for a husband to hit or beat his wife for at least one 
of the following reasons:
(a) Neglecting their child; 
(b) Burning the food;
(c) Arguing with him;
(d) Going out without telling him;
(e) Refusing to have sexual intercourse with him.
16
Two per cent of women aged 15–49 years were forced to have sex against their will
and 13 per cent have been victims of some type of violence.
17
13. Social protection is the main Government strategy to reduce poverty, 
vulnerability and inequality. In recent years, UNICEF has supported the Government 
in establishing the National Council of Social Protection, led by the Prime Minister,
to achieve greater integration of social services. However, sectoral policies require 
stronger coordination and the country lacks a workforce capable of helping those most 
likely to be left behind.18 The formulation of an equitable and child rights-focused 
social policy is hampered by the limited availability and use of evidence to inform 
Government budgeting and programming priorities.
14. Before COVID-19, only 6 per cent of households in the two lowest wealth 
quintiles received cash transfers or social benefits, and only 1.4 per cent of children 
under the age of 5 years and fewer than 1 per cent of children aged 5–17 years had 
health insurance coverage.
19
 UNICEF has been supporting the Government to 
complement the cash transfer programmes with care interventions and family-friendly 
policies, including the implementation of the Parental Education programme. 
However, social protection programmes are inefficiently distributed and monitored. 
In 2021, the World Bank estimated that the poverty rate in the country will increase 
from 67 per cent to 78 per cent due to the global crisis.
20
15. In 2020, only 36 per cent of households had access to safely managed drinking 
water and 42 per cent had access to basic drinking water from an improved source. 
Similarly, in 2020, 13 per cent of households had basic sanitation services, and 55 per
cent of the population used a handwashing facility with soap and water.21 Only 76 per
cent of the country’s schools have access to basic sanitation. However, there are major 
data gaps for schools and other facilities.
16. Sao Tome and Principe is threatened by rising sea levels, changes in rainfall 
patterns, increasing temperatures and extreme weather. This poses substantial risks to 
15 “Sao Tome and Principe 2019 Datasets”.
16 Ibid.
17 Ibid.
18 United Nations, Socioeconomic Impact Assessment and Socioeconomic Response Plan to 
COVID-19 – STP, 2021. Available at https://saotomeeprincipe.un.org/pt/205835-pnarme.
19 Ibid.
20 UNICEF, “Situation analysis on children and women in Sao Tome and Principe ” (unpublished).
21 World Health Organization and UNICEF, “Updated global estimates for WASH in health care 
filitiNlhlf lk bihii”Ailblt htt//hdt/the health of the population and threatens their livelihoods. The absence of climate 
data and risks assessments implies weak disaster risk reduction plans and responses.
17. Lessons learned from the concluding country programme include: 
(a) The national and district capacity for generating quality data needs to be 
strengthened to improve planning and monitoring processes and investments for 
children;
(b) Adequate financing and efficient public spending are core to addressing 
inequities facing children;
(c) Integrated approaches to social services are needed to tackle structural 
constraints by optimizing limited human resources capacity, funding and partnerships;
(d) Multisectoral approaches need clear coordination and monitoring systems;
(e) Risk-based programming is crucial for resilient social systems to respond 
more efficiently to risks and impacts caused by climate change.
Programme priorities and partnerships
18. In order to speed up efforts to achieve the targets of the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, UNICEF will shift to a more strategic approach to improve 
the access to, and availability of, quality social services, to promote behavioural 
change, and to advocate for gender and child-sensitive policies to enable children, 
including adolescents, to realize their rights. The country programme’s theory of 
change is based on priorities identified with partners and from lessons learned. It sets 
out that if:
(a) The Government has enhanced capacities to plan, implement, monitor and 
coordinate service delivery to address children’s vulnerability to poverty and reduce 
persistent disparities;
(b) Policies and strategies affecting children are adequately budgeted and 
domestic resources are used efficiently to sustain quality social services;
(c) Families, adolescents, children and communities are supported in
adopting sociocultural norms favourable to child rights;
(d) Children, especially adolescents, are empowered to promote child rights;
(e) Strategic partnerships are built with the public and private sector to unlock 
resources for sustainable, innovative, at-scale and timely interventions across a
child’s life;
then children, including adolescents, particularly the poorest and most marginalized, 
will have access to quality social services and live in favourable and safe 
environments that allow them to develop fully.
19. The proposed Country Programme between the Government of Sao Tome and 
Principe and UNICEF is aligned with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women. It also aligns with the 
Programme of the 17th Constitutional Government 2018–2022 and derives from the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2023–2027 
(UNSDCF) Outcome 1:
By 2027, people in Sao Tome and Principe, in particular the people left behind and 
most vulnerable, benefit from quality and inclusive social systems and have access to 
integrated social protection.By 2027, people benefit from transparent, responsive and gender-sensitive 
institutions.
In line with the UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2022–2025, the programme consists of five 
programme components, all mainstreaming adolescents.
20. The programme will promote multisectoral approaches to enhance the impact 
for children. Early childhood development interventions will be integrated across 
early learning, health and protection services to promote safe, responsive and 
nurturing caregiving. Programming for adolescents will emphasize the access to, and 
relevance of, learning and adequate life skills; health services including mental health; 
sexual and reproductive health services; violence prevention and response; and action 
on climate change.
21. The programme will leverage the presence and worldwide experience of
UNICEF to advance the children’s agenda, working closely with the Government. It
will continue investing in increasing access to services, while focusing on quality and 
equity to reach the most vulnerable. The programme will capitalize on the country’s
small size and will prioritize:
(a) systems strengthening by improving access to, and the quality of, service 
provision in health, education, child protection and social protection;
(b) professionalizing the social service workforce across social welfare, 
health and justice departments;
(c) establishing multisectoral case management and referrals for prevention 
and response to violence;
(d) building capacities in data and evidence-driven approaches;
(e) modelling innovative interventions;
(f) generating demand, particularly among adolescents;
(g) improving the efficiency of public spending.
22. The programme will bring together United Nations agencies, the Government
and development partners, working in support of child-centred, gender-focused and 
equitable results. The United Nations Delivering as One initiative will be 
strengthened, positioning UNICEF as a lead agency in designing and implementing
joint programmes contributing to the Inclusive Social System Pillar of the UNSDCF 
with a focus on children and adolescents. Partnerships with the private sector will be 
intensified at local level and with UNICEF National Committees (Italy, Portugal, 
Spain and Sweden), to leverage resources within agro-industry, tourism and 
telecommunications. Private sector engagement will include scaling up technology, 
innovation and financing; influencing and challenging the prevailing gender norms 
and stereotypes; and raising awareness to prevent child labour and sexual 
exploitation.
23. Country-specific approaches will be scaled up to address disparities
experienced by children and adolescents. The programme will identify and support 
children from the most marginalized groups, including those in extreme poverty and 
with disabilities.
Equitable child survival: health, nutrition, water, sanitation and 
hygiene
24. This component contributes to UNSDCF Outcome 1 and is aligned with the
Government’s policies on health and nutrition, sanitation and the environment from Ministry of Public Works, Natural Resources and Environment, and the Ministry of 
Youth and Sports . The programme will support the Government in strengthening
health systems, for improved maternal, neonatal, child and adolescents’ health,
nutrition, HIV, and water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services. The programme
will aim to:
(a) Advocate for evidence-based policies, increased budget allocations, and 
improved efficiency of public spending;
(b) Build capacities for improved sectoral and multisectoral coordination 
among key stakeholders to leverage and scale up results for children;
(c) Improve evidence-based planning, information systems and quality 
services nationally and at district level;
(d) Promote social and behaviour change for healthy and protective 
behaviours.
25. In partnership with the World Health Organization (WHO) and Gavi, the
Vaccine Alliance, the programme will use immunization platforms as entry points to 
expand access to child health and nutrition services, as well as birth registration.
26. The programme will prioritize an integrated primary health-care approach for 
universal health as well as promote the modelling of a community health component. 
UNICEF will deepen United Nations collaboration, particularly with WHO and the 
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), to improve national information 
systems and district planning and increase allocations and expenditures based on 
results.
27. In collaboration with WHO and the United Nations Population Fund 
(UNFPA), the programme will support the development of a strategy to address 
adolescent pregnancy, violence, mental health and nutrition. Interpersonal skills of 
health workers will be strengthened to deliver adolescent-friendly, gender-responsive 
and quality health-care services in a supportive, respectful and non-discriminatory 
manner, encouraging the demand for essential health services.
28. Social behaviour change interventions will be implemented in coordination 
with WHO and UNFPA, ensuring that girls and boys, families and communities strive 
to access quality health services, adopt positive parenting practices, embrace safe and 
healthy behaviours and demand quality assistance for the well-being of their children.
29. Adolescent-led solutions will be sought to promote healthy, protective 
behaviours among their peers and communities, on HIV, violence, early pregnancy, 
nutrition, open defecation, climate change, and hygiene, including menstrual hygiene 
management. Different platforms will be used to engage and equip adolescents, 
including those who are out of school, with skills to act as agents of positive change.
30. The WASH component will promote behaviour change towards the adoption 
of appropriate practices (household water treatment and storage, demand for water 
and sanitation and services, and the elimination of open defecation). This will be 
implemented through the Community Led Total Sanitation approach, which supports
communities playing an active role in service delivery. This approach also builds 
resilience, as local risks and environmental conditions are taken into account. The 
programme will start by analysing the baseline situation of climate-related issues 
affecting children, focusing on but not limited to WASH.
31. The programme will help improve the WASH National Information System, 
including the collection of reliable data, to monitor:
(a) The functionality of safe water sources or systems;(b) Water-stressed areas;
(c) Hydrogeological data;
(d) WASH infrastructures in schools and health centres;
(e) Health data sets (cholera rate, HIV, malnutrition) indicating risk-prone 
areas.
32. The programme will assist the Government in ensuring that children, including 
adolescents, and their families have access to safe and resilient WASH services in 
coordination with strategic partners including the European Union, the World Bank, 
bilateral donors and partners. The Government will be supported in promoting the 
national WASH strategy and enhancing intersectoral coordination at national and 
subnational levels.
Education
33. This component contributes to UNSDCF Outcome 1, under the leadership of 
the Ministry of Education, Culture and Sciences, in collaboration with the Ministry 
of Youth and Sports. UNICEF will support the implementation of priority 
interventions of the national Education Policy Charter 2019–2023 aimed at achieving 
universal access to 12 years of free, quality education and more higher and alternative
education opportunities adapted to labour-market needs. In partnership with UNDP, 
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the 
World Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO), UNFPA and WHO, the programme will continue supporting 
the Government to:
(a) Increase access to and reduce inequities in pre-primary education;
(b) Ensure a healthy, safe, inclusive and stimulating environment in primary 
schools by improving learning outcomes;
(c) Increase retention through digital learning, life skills education, 
strengthening school management and introducing multisectoral interventions;
(d) Expand the offer of quality alternative learning pathways for out-of-school 
girls and boys.
34. The programme will build on lessons from the COVID-19 response. In 
collaboration with the World Bank and the Global Partnership for Education, it will
tackle the learning crisis through supplying information and communication 
technology equipment, by developing digital learning content and training and by 
enhancing foundational literacy and numeracy. Children’s and adolescents’ learning, 
empowerment, citizenship and employability will be promoted by integrating twentyfirst-century skills and gender and climate change education, and ensuring the 
participation of children, girls and boys. UNICEF will help build the national capacity 
to update, implement and monitor gender and disability-sensitive policies in 
coordination with youth and social protection sectors. It will focus on strengthening 
the Government’s role in quality assurance and standard-setting, as well as on the 
districts’ supervisory responsibility to enforce the education sector’s regulatory 
framework and improve overall accountability.
35. The programme will continue prioritizing early learning and school readiness 
as drivers of foundational learning outcomes. It will accelerate access to quality pre -
primary education, especially for the most vulnerable, through training of pre-primary
teachers and awareness-raising on positive parenting and thorough analysis of the 
allocation and spending efficiency in pre-primary education.36. The programme will adopt a comprehensive approach to improve the learning 
environment and retention in primary schools. UNICEF will work to support the 
Government to adopt a multisectoral approach using schools as platforms for the 
delivery of coordinated interventions in WASH, climate change, health and nutrition, 
and violence prevention. School management will be improved by training teachers 
to deliver innovative pedagogies for improved foundational skills, updating the legal 
framework of teacher training to include quality standards, and engaging parents and 
caregivers to better support children learning at home and to participate in the 
governance of schools.
37. The programme will invest in modelling innovative approaches in primary 
education, such as digital learning, focusing on the capacity-strengthening of teachers
and education institutions, as well as on developing appealing pedagogical content. 
Evaluation will be integrated to assess the degree to which digital learning contributes
to improved numeracy and literacy outcomes. UNICEF will leverage its leading role,
through the local education group, to mobilize and influence development partners 
and the private sector for harmonized interventions on digital learning and to advocate 
for Internet connectivity in all schools.
38. The programme will support increased access to equitable, inclusive and 
quality lower and upper secondary education with alternative learning opportunities
to promote school retention, especially for children at risk of dropping out, and to 
ensure that out-of-school adolescents continue to learn. UNICEF will work with the 
World Bank, the European Union, the Global Partnership for Education, United 
Nations agencies and civil society to support the Government to design flexible 
learning pathways and implement multisectoral measures, including social and child 
protection to prevent school dropout, early pregnancy and violence, and to create
alternative learning opportunities for adolescents (aged 11–19 years) in and out of 
school.
Child protection
39. This component contributes to UNSDCF Outcome 1 and will be led by the 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, Public 
Administration and Human Rights, the Ministry of Defence and Internal 
Administration, the Ministry of Women’s Rights, the Ministry of Education, Culture 
and Sciences, the Ministry of Youth and Sports, and other key actors. In coordination 
with WHO, UNFPA and UNDP, the programme will support interventions focused on 
the protection of children, including adolescents, from violence, notably sexual 
violence, and early pregnancy.
40. The programme will continue to support a more resilient, inclusive, gendersensitive and disability-responsive multisectoral child protection system, with a
strengthened social service workforce, and will support efforts to increase budget
efficiency. It will strengthen the collaboration and referrals between social welfare, 
justice, health and education services to operationalize a national integrated child 
protection case management system. In particular, strengthening administrative data 
systems will be prioritized to improve the quality of child protection evidence.
41. The programme will continue supporting the acquisition of knowledge, skills 
and capacity of children, including adolescents, and families to prevent and report 
violence and harmful practices and to adopt positive parenting practices. There will 
be a specific focus on intersectoral links for reducing early pregnancies and violence, 
through health, education and social protection interventions. Skills-building 
initiatives will equip children, including adolescents, to act as role models that 
positively influence attitudes and behaviours around early pregnancyviolence and Social inclusion
42. This component contributes to UNSDCF Outcomes 1 and 4, and is aligned 
with the constitutional Government’s Five-Year Action Plan 2018–2022. It will be led
by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Social Affairs, the Ministry of Planning,
Finance and Blue Economy, the Ministry of Women’s Rights, the National Institute 
of Statistics and the Ministry of Youth and Sports. The programme will partner with 
the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the World Bank to strengthen social 
protection systems and develop policies to improve the effective implementation of 
child-sensitive, equitable and inclusive social protection services.
43. The programme will strengthen the Government’s capacity to measure and 
respond to poverty and inequities, focusing on the most vulnerable and optimizing 
limited resources. This will include generating evidence on monetary and 
multidimensional poverty, and a budget analysis of social sectors to advocate for the 
development of evidence-based child-friendly policies, plans and budgets. The 
programme will engage civil society stakeholders across the budget cycle and 
decision-making processes to enhance accountability across the country. The 
programme will support the Government to update its social protection strategy to 
improve efficiency, increase coverage and ensure greater resilience to shocks. It will 
integrate lessons learned from the parenting education programme suggesting the
need to professionalize and decentralize social services, reinforce multisectoral 
coordination, including with civil society, and develop evidence-based and 
contextualized communication plans.
44. Links to other programmes will be strengthened, especially with child 
protection, to enable the social protection workforce to deliver effective case 
management and psychosocial support, complementing the national cash transfer 
programme to vulnerable families. The programme will work with ILO to improve
the existing Social Registry to ensure a more disability and gender-inclusive registry
that is able to adequately increase social protection coverage.
45. The programme will strengthen the capacities of Parliament, district 
assemblies and ombudsmen to influence child-friendly policies and budgeting. To this 
end, UNICEF will enhance monitoring processes, and share key research so that 
investment in children is at the core of the Government’s agenda.
46. The programme will reinforce mechanisms for adolescents’ participation and 
support the engagement of civil society in decision-making processes to increase 
accountability. It will raise awareness among children of their rights, empowering
them to act as positive agents of change on social, economic, climate and 
environmental issues. The programme will support greater access to information and 
tools to enhance their participation and monitoring to advance the children’s rights 
agenda, promote budget transparency and oversee the progress of plans.
Programme effectiveness
47. The programme will be efficiently coordinated and managed in accordance 
with quality standards and in line with the UNSDCF 2023–2027. In order to ensure 
access to quality social services and to promote resilient systems and communities,
multisectoral approaches will be systematically implemented to address gender 
barriers, mainstream early childhood and adolescent development, promote social 
behavioural change and strengthen emergency preparedness and response.
48. UNICEF will strengthen the capacity of implementing partners in the areas of
data collection and analysis for effective planning, monitoring and evaluation, resultsb
d t d thtif l littid b49. The programme will seek to accelerate the children’s agenda through 
increased evidence-based communication and advocacy strategies. UNICEF will 
invest in transformative partnerships to amplify advocacy messages, and leverage the 
commitment of decision makers, international development partners and the private 
sector. Digital transformation and innovation will be central to improving
implementation and monitoring mechanisms, disseminating knowledge and ensuring
meaningful internal and external communication.
Summary budget table
Programme component
(In thousands of United States dollars)
Regular 
resources
Other 
resources Total
Health, nutrition, WASH 900 1 700 2 600
Education 700 1 900 2 600
Child protection 720 1 130 1 850
Social inclusion 720 920 1 640
Programme effectiveness 1 275 550 1 825
Total 4 315 6 200 10 515
Programme and risk management
50. This CPD outlines the contributions of UNICEF to national and subnational 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for 
aligning results with resources assigned to the programme at country level. 
Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and headquarters levels for country 
programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies 
and procedures.
51. UNICEF will strengthen joint programming with other United Nations 
agencies. The business operations strategy will be implemented to harmonize and 
reduce operating costs. United Nations agencies will continue to share common 
premises and some common services. UNICEF will strengthen the management of 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers (HACT) and sustain compliance with other 
risk control mechanisms while continuing to strengthen its operations by ensuring 
value for money, quality, efficiency and effectiveness.
52. A significant risk to programme implementation is insufficient evidence and 
weak information systems for planning and budget allocation. Official development 
assistance is also expected to decline, due to several factors including the country’s 
expected graduation from least-developed country status. In response, the programme 
will focus on strengthening the social sectors’ information systems and on developing
research and evaluation.
53. Innovative and results-focused programming will drive the engagement with 
bilateral donors, multi-donor trust funds, global and country-level partnerships, 
international financial institutions, international foundations, the private sector and Monitoring and evaluation
54. UNICEF will continue working with ministries to generate and use 
disaggregated data. It will contribute to achieve key national data milestones: the 
national census (2023/2024) and the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (2024/2025), 
which will be used to report on outcome indicators.
55. UNICEF will also support evidence-based planning, for the Government to 
identify excluded children, focusing budgets and plans to support children’s 
development. This will ensure that relevant and reliable administrative data from line 
ministries are regularly produced, which will also benefit the reporting on output 
indicators.
56. UNICEF will work with relevant national institutions to monitor progress 
towards national and international goals, specifically the Sustainable Development
Goals, within the UNSDCF monitoring processes and mechanisms.
57. In coordination with the Government and partners, UNICEF will hold annual 
and midterm reviews to ensure that the programme builds on lessons learned and its 
design remains focused on tangible results for children.9526 13
E/ICEF/2023/P/L.1
Results and resources framework
Sao Tome and Principe – UNICEF country programme of cooperation, 2023–2027
Convention on the Rights of the Child: Articles 2–40 
Sustainable Development Goals: 1–6, 8, 10, 11, 13, 16, 17
National priorities: Constitutional Government’s Five-Year Action Plan 2018–2022
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) outcomes involving UNICEF: Outcomes 1 (Outputs 1–
4) and 4 (Outputs 1 and 3)
Related UNICEF Strategic Plan, 2022–2025 Goal Areas: 1–5
UNSDCF 
outcomes UNICEF outcomes
Key progress indicators, 
baselines (B) and targets (T)
Means of 
verification
Indicative country programme 
outputs
Major partners, 
partnership 
frameworks
Indicative resources by country 
programme outcome: regular 
resources (RR), other resources (OR) 
(In thousands of 
United States dollars)
RR OR Total
Outcome 1:
By 2027, 
people in Sao
Tome and 
Principe, in 
particular the 
people left 
behind and 
most 
vulnerable, 
benefit from 
quality and 
inclusive 
social systems 
and have 
access to 
integrated 
social 
protection
1. By 2027, all 
children and 
women, girls and 
boys in Sao Tome 
and Principe have 
equitable access 
to and use quality 
primary health 
care for maternal, 
neonatal, child 
and adolescent 
health services 
and equitable and 
sustainable 
improved water, 
sanitation and 
hygiene services 
in rural and urban 
environments
Per cent of children 
(girls/boys) 0–11 
months vaccinated 
nationally with three
doses of DTPcontaining/Penta 
vaccine 
(diphtheria/tetanus/pert
ussis, hepatitis B and 
Hib)
B (2021): 96% 
T (2027): 100% 
District 
Health 
Information 
Software 
(DHIS2)
1. By 2027, the national 
health system, especially at 
subnational and community 
level, has increased 
capacity to conduct 
planning and to deliver 
more integrated, friendly 
and quality maternal,
neonatal, child and 
adolescent health services.
2. By 2027, key policies 
and norms are approved, 
Government capacity to 
coordinate and implement 
WASH programmes 
increases and more 
institutions have access to 
adequate water and 
sanitation services.
Ministry of 
Health, 
Labour and 
Social Affairs
(MoH), 
Ministry of 
Public Works, 
Natural 
Resources 
and 
Environment, 
Ministry of 
Education, 
Culture and 
Sciences
(MECS), 
Ministry of 
Youth and
Sports
(MoY), 
Ministry of 
900 1 700 2 600
Proportion of the 
population practising 
open defecation
B (2019): 42.6%
T (2027): 20%
Demographic 
and Health 
Survey 
(DHS)/
Multiple 
Indicator 
Cluster 17 22-2
EF/2023/P/L.14
UNSDCF 
outcomes UNICEF outcomes
Key progress indicators, 
baselines (B) and targets (T)
Means of 
verification
Indicative country programme 
outputs
Major partners, 
partnership 
frameworks
programme outcome: regular 
resources (RR), other resources (OR) 
(In thousands of 
United States dollars)
RR OR Total
Survey (MICS)3. By 2027, more children, 
adolescents and families 
adopt safe, healthy and
protective behaviours, and 
improve their sanitation 
and handwashing practices,
and communities achieve 
the status “open defecation 
free”.
Planning and 
Blue 
Economy (MoF), local 
authorities
World Health 
Organization (WHO), 
United 
Nations 
Population 
Fund (UNFPA
), 
United 
Nations 
Development 
Programme (UNDP), 
World Food 
Programme (WFP)
Gavi, the 
Vaccine 
Alliance,
World Bank,
European 
Union, civil 
society, 
bilateral 
cooperation 
Outcome1 2. By 2027, 
children and 
adolescents, 
particularly girls 
and the most 
vulnerable, have 
equitable and 
inclusive access 
Gross enrolment ratio 
in pre-primary 
education (girls/boys)
B(2019): 55% 
T (2027): 70% 
Annual statistics; 
MICS, 
Programme reports 
1. By 2027, government 
capacity in evidence-based 
policy, coordination and 
planning is increased,
resulting in improved 
learning outcomes through 
adequate school 
environment and quality 
MECS, MoY, 
MoH, MoF, 
local 
authorities
WHO, 
UNFPA, 
UNDP, WFP, 
700190026009526 15
E/ICEF/2023/P/L.1
UNSDCF 
outcomes UNICEF outcomes
Key progress indicators, 
baselines (B) and targets (T)
Means of 
verification
Indicative country programme 
outputs
Major partners, 
partnership 
frameworks
programme outcome: regular 
resources (RR), other resources (OR) 
(In thousands of 
United States dollars)
RR OR Total
to quality 
education with 
alternative 
learning 
opportunities in a 
safe and 
stimulating 
environment, and 
acquire the basic 
skills, attitudes 
and values 
needed for life
Completion rate 
(primary education, 
lower secondary 
education, upper 
secondary education) (girls/boys)* B (2019):
Primary: 87%, lower 
secondary: 60%, upper 
secondary: 10%
T (2027): Primary: 92%, 
lower 
secondary: 63%, upper 
secondary: 14%
MICS and innovative education at 
all levels (preschool, 
primary and secondary). 
2. By 2027, families, 
adolescents and 
communities participate 
actively in the 
improvement of the 
education system with a 
clear understanding and 
demand of the 
accountability for 
investments of public and 
private resources in 
coordination with 
educational institutions. 
3. By 2027, a greater proportion of out-of-school 
adolescents, including 
those with disabilities (13–
19 years old), return to 
school through alternative
education or are enrolled in 
and completea vocational 
education programme, 
including life skills, and
are prepared for the 
transition to adulthood and 
labour-market 
opportunities.
United 
Nations 
Industrial 
Development 
Organization (UNIDO), 
United 
Nations 
Educational, 
Scientific and 
Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO)
Global 
Partnership 
for Education, 
World Bank,
European 
Union, civil 
society, 
bilateral 
cooperation17 22-2
EF/2023/P/L.14
UNSDCF 
outcomes UNICEF outcomes
Key progress indicators, 
baselines (B) and targets (T)
Means of 
verification
Indicative country programme 
outputs
Major partners, 
partnership 
frameworks
programme outcome: regular 
resources (RR), other resources (OR) 
(In thousands of 
United States dollars)
RR OR Total
Outcome1 3. By 2027, more 
children, girls 
and boys and 
their families, 
especially the 
most vulnerable, 
are better 
protected from 
violence, abuse, 
neglect, 
exploitation, 
through greater 
access to 
multisectoral,
preventive and 
response services 
within a child-
sensitive 
enhanced legal, 
policy and 
sociocultural 
environment
Percentage of mothers 
(or primary caregivers) 
who think that physical 
punishment is 
necessary to 
raise/educate children 
B (2019): 14% 
T (2027): 10%
MICS 1. By 2027, the national 
child protection system 
will be reinforced with 
more adequate human and 
financial resources, 
evidence-based planning 
and coordination systems 
for the prevention and 
coordinated response to 
cases of violence, 
especially against girls.
2. By 2027, children, girls 
and boys (especially the 
most vulnerable), and their 
families and communities, 
have greater knowledge 
and awareness and are 
better equipped to prevent 
violence, and also to access 
services relevant to their 
protection and well-being.
MoH, 
Ministry of 
Justice, 
Public 
Administratio
n and Human 
Rights, MECS, 
Ministry of 
Women’s 
Rights, 
Ministry of 
Defence and 
Internal 
Administratio n, 
Prosecutor’s
Office, MoY, 
MoF, local 
authorities 
UNFPA, 
UNDP, ILO
Civil society, 
adolescents’ 
bilateral 
cooperation
7201 1301 850
Number of girls and 
boys who have 
experienced violence, 
reached by health, 
social work or 
justice/law enforcement 
services* 
Violence: B (2021): 82 T (2027): 160
Sexual violence: B (2021): 36
T (2027): 60
Programme 
reports
Outcomes1
(see above)
and4:
By 2027, people 
benefit from 
transparent, 
responsive and 
gender-sensitive 
institutions
4. By 2027, more 
vulnerable 
children, boys, 
girls and women, 
benefit from an 
improved and 
inclusive social 
protection 
system, 
implemented 
according to 
updated 
Proportion of child 
population covered by 
social protection 
floors/systems*
B(2019): 7.6%
T (2027): 12%
MICS 1. By 2027, public 
institutions, civil society 
and children/youth’s 
parliament will increase 
their capacity to generate 
and use disaggregated data 
for evidence-based and
child-friendly policies, 
plans and budgets.
MoH, MECS, 
MoY, MoF, 
Ministry of 
Women’s 
Rights, local 
authorities 
UNFPA, 
UNDP, ILO
World Bank, 
civil society, 
720 9201 640
National budget and 
social sector 
Programme 
reports9526 17
E/ICEF/2023/P/L.1
UNSDCF 
outcomes UNICEF outcomes
Key progress indicators, 
baselines (B) and targets (T)
Means of 
verification
Indicative country programme 
outputs
Major partners, 
partnership 
frameworks
programme outcome: regular 
resources (RR), other resources (OR) 
(In thousands of 
United States dollars)
RR OR Total
policy, plans and 
budgets while 
improving 
transparency and 
public 
participation in 
all the relevant 
stages
investments are 
routinely monitored
B (2022): No
T (2027): Yes
2. By 2027, the 
Government, in 
collaboration with civil 
society, improves its 
capacity at central and 
district levels to implement 
child-sensitive, equitable 
and inclusive social 
protection services.
bilateral 
cooperation
Programme effectiveness outcome 1 275 550 1 825
Total resources 4 315 6 200 10 515
* Outcome indicator aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework indicator.