File Name: SUR-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Suriname
Country Code: SUR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January – 4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
30 November 2021
Original: Language
2117646X (E) 021221 
First regular session 2022
31 January – 4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Suriname (2022-2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Suriname (2022-2026) ..................................................... 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework
1. Suriname is classified as an upper-middle-income country, with an average growth 
rate from 1975 to 2015 of 1.6 per cent, roughly half the average growth rate of other Latin 
American and Caribbean countries.
1 After the 2015 commodity price shock, Suriname 
suffered a recession from which it is still recovering. The economy experienced a triple 
commodity shock: first, the price of gold declined by 30 per cent compared to 2012; 
secondly, crude oil prices dropped by 56 per cent compared to a previous peak in 2012; 
and finally, alumina production came to a halt.2 The Surinamese Government has 
manifested its commitment to democracy, strong democratic institutions, good 
governance, the rule of law, human rights, fundamental freedoms and peace and security.
2. Before the recession, the economic growth was fuelled by high commodity prices 
for gold, lumber, oil and bauxite and higher remittances. These commodities being the 
cornerstone of the Surinamese economy, the country’s growth rate declined by 3.4 per 
cent and 5.6 per cent in 2015 and 2016, respectively.3Its gross domestic product (GDP) 
is approximately $9.9 billion (World Bank, 2020). Real GDP (constant, inflationadjusted) reached $4.5 billion in 2017.
4 Suriname ranked 97 of 189 countries on the 2020 
Human Development Index.
3. The Government’s announcement in January 2020 of the discovery of offshore banks 
of oil was welcome news for the country’s recovery from the recession and its economic 
growth. The Suriname dollar continues to devalue against the United States dollar, from 
an average of 7:1 in mid-2020 to 20:1 in mid-2021. With defaults on international debt,
the Government launched a macroeconomic reform plan and reached a staff-level 
agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for balanced budget support.
4. One of the nine Amazon countries, Suriname has a wealth of forest resources and
other natural resources such as gold and oil. With many waterways, low-lying coastal 
areas and two defined annual wet seasons, the country is prone to natural hazards such as 
flooding.
5. UNDP is the largest of only five resident United Nations agencies in the country,
with a strong programme offering comprising democratic governance, social 
development, natural resources management and climate change. UNDP has a strong 
comparative advantage for partnerships and programme implementation with its presence 
in the country and strong partnerships with State and non-State actors.
6. UNDP also has a comparative advantage through its human development mandate,
already demonstrated in Suriname through joint initiatives with other United Nations 
agencies; leading on activities such as the assessment of the socioeconomic impact of the 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic; and engaging other agencies in supporting 
and advocating for indigenous and tribal peoples. Its global experience, mechanisms and 
tools, and stakeholders’ expectations that UNDP act as an integrator and consolidate 
inter-agency efforts towards meeting the Sustainable Development Goals, are other 
aspects of its mandate. UNDP will focus on comprehensive solutions towards ensuring
the respect of the rights and integrated development of persons with disabilities and
indigenous and tribal peoples.
7. UNDP has been recognized for having a strong programme and niche in natural 
resources management, contributing to capacity strengthening and building resilience. 
The programmes in social development and governance have been more modest yet 
1 Khadan J (2020) “Macroeconomic Effects of Commodity Shocks in a Small Resource Dependent Economy” Inter-American 
Development Bank, Unprocessed.
2
Ibid.
3
bidDP/DCP/SUR/4
innovative and transformative.5 UNDP will continue to build its programme portfolio,
ensure strong broad-based consultations, raise the visibility of the results achieved and
advocate for vulnerable and marginalized groups.6
8. Suriname reported its first case of COVID-19 on 13 March 2020 and as of 10 August
2021, had reported a cumulative total of 27,281 confirmed cases and 696 deaths. UNDP
was a key partner of the National Coordination Center for Disaster Management (NCCR),
designated as the lead government agency for pandemic response. UNDP was in a key
position to respond, supporting the NCCR with procurement and distribution of personal 
protective equipment (PPE) for national stockpiles and social institutions including 
orphanages, homes for the elderly and shelters for abused persons.7
9. In addition to procurement of PPE, UNDP responded to requests for COVID-19 
support in several areas, including leading the United Nations Country Team in the
socioeconomic impact assessment of the first six months of the pandemic; supporting the 
development of a national referral pathway for reducing gender-based violence; hosting 
sessions on digital inclusion with a range of stakeholders; and conducting a specific rapid 
digital assessment of the impact of the pandemic on indigenous and tribal peoples.
10. The pandemic has exacerbated the plight of marginalized groups, and UNDP 
continues to support government efforts to achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development and leave no one behind, particularly women and girls, youth, persons with 
disabilities and indigenous and tribal peoples. Indigenous people make up just 4 per cent 
of the population but recorded a disproportionately high percentage – 13.6 per cent – of 
cases of COVID-19 and related deaths.
8 The indigenous and tribal peoples live mostly in 
remote, rural areas of the Amazon with limited social services, including lack of proper 
water and sanitation systems, making it difficult to apply infection, prevention and 
control measures. They have also been impacted by food insecurity during the pandemic.
11. During the previous programme, UNDP supported the enhancement of citizen 
security through various interventions of political analysis and prospective scenarios. 
Continuing over 20 years of electoral support, UNDP provided assistance and support to 
the Republic of Suriname ahead of, during and after the 2020 national elections and 
subnational elections, leading to a peaceful transfer of power.
12. Successful interventions included collaboration with the Government of the 
Netherlands to support increasing the number of female parliamentarians. In the 2020 
elections, 29 per cent of elected members of parliament were women9. Another success 
was the collaboration with civil society organizations to: (a) promote the participation of 
youth in elections to raise awareness among the youth and first-time voters of the 
importance of voting and making an informed choice; and (b) implement a civic 
education programme for eligible voters with visual or hearing disabilities. One main 
challenge under this portfolio remained the limited financing available for democratic 
governance programming, which limited the ability of UNDP to leverage itself as a 
significant player in this area.
13. UNDP has demonstrated experience in supporting persons with disabilities,
including strong engagement with organizations that work with them. This included:
(a) bringing the Sustainable Development Goals to blind, vision-impaired, deaf and 
hearing-impaired persons;10 (b) contributing to the establishment of the Alliance of 
5 Gibradze, Nana and Faranaaz Pahalwankhan. 2021. Evaluation of the UNDP Suriname country programme (2017-2021).
6
Ibid.
7 UNDP (2020) UNDP Multi-faceted COVID-19 Response in Suriname. 17 December 2020. 
8 Government of Suriname/Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) (2021) Suriname COVID-19 Situation Report 63. 30 April, 
2021.
9UNDP Suriname Project Document 2019. Technical Support in the Administration and Conduct of the 2020 General Elections in 
iPersons with Disabilities;
11 and (c) supporting decent work and entrepreneurship 
development for persons with disabilities. This support contributed to greater awareness 
of policies and interventions addressing equal access and exclusion, employment and 
livelihood opportunities and improved quality of life. Support for electoral processes also 
included specific messages and engagement for persons with disabilities. 
14. UNDP led the socioeconomic impact assessment12 of the first six months of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, then commissioned a specific rapid digital assessment of 300 
indigenous households, including a multidimensional analysis.
13 UNDP responded to the 
needs of indigenous communities with interventions to improve sanitation, strengthen 
livelihoods, develop specific awareness messages in ethnic languages and enhance food 
security.
14 These activities began in the previous programme and will continue into the 
period 2022-2026.
15. UNDP led the process of supporting the Government on issues related to high forest
and low deforestation countries. In 2019, under the chairmanship of the President of 
Suriname, the Government hosted the High Forest, Low Deforestation Country 
Conference on Climate Finance Mobilization,
15 which brought together over 15 such 
countries to discuss their strategic positioning, access to climate financing and protection 
of forest resources. The conference culminated in the landmark Krutu Declaration16
signalling the commitment of high forest, low deforestation developing countries to 
climate change adaptation, mitigation and financing. UNDP has continued supporting the 
Government on advocacy and leadership on related issues, including representation at 
high-level engagements.
16. During the next five years, UNDP will continue to focus on three programmatic areas 
of work aligned with the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNMSDCF), which embraces eradication of multidimensional 
poverty and conflict prevention, justice, environmental sustainability and building 
resilience.
17 Gender equality and partnerships are embraced as key cross-cutting issues,
and critical target groups include women, youth, persons with disabilities and indigenous 
and tribal peoples. 
17. UNDP was co-lead in partnership with four other United Nations agencies on 
accessing resources from the Sustainable Development Goals Fund for developing an 
integrated architecture for climate financing. This work will transition into the new
programme and additional resources for accelerating the Goals will be sought.
18. The programme will focus on Goal 1 (poverty reduction on livelihoods activities for 
indigenous and tribal persons); Goal 2 (food security for remote rural communities); Goal 
3 (health and well-being through the procurement of PPE); Goal 5 (gender equality
through support for reducing gender-based violence and promoting equal opportunities 
for both men and women); Goal 6 (water and sanitation for indigenous and tribal people
in the Surinamese Amazon); Goal 7 (clean energy through the support for implementation 
of the nationally appropriate mitigation action); Goal 8 (decent work through support for 
the Alliance of Persons with Disabilities); Goal 13 (climate action through adaptation and 
mitigation policies and strategies); Goal 14 (life underwater through strengthening of 
integrated water resources management and coastal zone management); Goal 15 (life on 
land through support of protected areas, sustainable extractive practices and reducing 
forest degradation); Goal 16 (peace and justice through support of citizens security); and 
Goal 17 (partnerships for the Goals with continued engagement with both State and non11 Alliance of Decent Work for People with Disabilities Project.
12 UNDP (2020). Socioeconomic impact assessment and response plan for COVID-19 in Suriname. 
13 UNDP (2021) Digital Socioeconomic Impact Assessment of COVID-19 among Indigenous Households in Suriname
14 UNDP, 2020. Mitigating Impact of COVID-19 on Indigenous and Tribal People in Suriname, Initiation Plan.
15 Government of Suriname/National Institute for Environment and Development in Suriname/United Nations/UNDP. 2019. High Forest 
Cover and Low Deforestation Conference on Climate Finance Mobilization. 
16 K
f PibJiDliHih FCd LDfiCliFiMbilii2019DP/DCP/SUR/4
State actors, including traditional and non-traditional partners and fostering South-South 
cooperation). 
19. UNDP is positioned as a strategic partner that is resident and the largest United 
Nations agency in the country, with a proven track record of focused interventions, strong 
engagement with development partners and donors and attention to new and emerging 
issues. UNDP has proven to be flexible, agile and responsive to critical national needs 
and challenges. Interventions will seek to build resilience to internal and external shocks,
including recovery from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, building resilience to 
climate change, strengthening governance platforms and improving lives and livelihoods. 
20. The UNDP presence on the ground, timely programmatic offering and strong 
partnerships with traditional and non-traditional donors will continue to be relevant in the 
next five years. UNDP has cooperated with traditional partners such as the World 
Wildlife Fund for Nature and Conservation International on nature-based solutions,
including securing co-financing commitments. UNDP has also worked with a nontraditional partner, Engineers Without Borders, to secure technical engineering advice for 
implementing water and sanitation solutions, with virtual interventions in the height of 
the pandemic, for indigenous and tribal people. UNDP will continue to fulfil its integrator 
role within the United Nations system, providing strong technical capacity in the three 
programme areas, bringing innovative solutions while embracing and promoting digital 
literacy and digital inclusion.
21. The programme will be inclusive and engage practical learning solutions and 
capacity-building through South-South and triangular cooperation. This will include 
regional neighbours such as Guyana with a shared border and commonality of offshore
oil, indigenous and tribal people, migration and disaster response issues.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
22. The new programme, and all three programmatic areas, has been agreed upon with 
the Government of Suriname through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International 
Business and International Cooperation and supported by consultations with government 
and non-government entities over 12 months. UNDP will continue to support Suriname 
in people-centred, inclusive and just interventions and build resilience, contribute to 
peace and justice and support access to basic social services. The three programmatic 
areas are interlinked, integrating nature-based solutions, justice and social services with
the engagement of stakeholders that are relevant to all three programmatic areas.
23. The Government of Suriname is formulating a new National Development Plan for 
2022–2026 and also has a COVID Recovery Plan, with which this UNDP programme is 
aligned. The National Development Plan and the COVID-19 Recovery Plan focus on 
macroeconomic recovery, poverty reduction and COVID-19 recovery while engaging on 
the 2030 Agenda and the Sustainable Development Goals. With the United Nations 
Country Team, and as a contribution to the UNMSDCF 2022-2026, UNDP will support 
the Government in implementing its plans through institutional strengthening and 
capacity-building, nature-based solutions and engagement with vulnerable groups.
24. The UNMSDCF, formulated jointly by the United Nations system and the 
Governments of the Caribbean subregion, included national consultations with 18 
countries to ensure that the development challenges identified in the Common Multicountry Assessment are consistent with national development needs. These consultations 
served as inputs to the development of this UNDP programme, which is fully aligned 
with the UNMSDCF and anchored in its theory of change, which highlights people, 
planet, prosperity, peace and partnership as pathways to the Sustainable Development 
Goals and which will be supported by UNDP in three programmatic areas.
25. During the next five years, UNDP will focus on: (a) democratic governance;equality will be integrated as a cross-cutting element, employing methods of innovation 
and digital inclusion with a focus on vulnerable groups including persons with 
disabilities, indigenous and tribal people and small and medium-sized enterprises.
26. UNDP programmes will integrate gender at all phases of the project cycle. The
development of this five-year programme has been gender-informed through various 
consultations, including a major gender consultation with the Bureau of Gender Affairs 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs, which shared the national gender plan,
18 and engaging 
with a wide cross section of stakeholders from government, civil society and academia,
hosted jointly by UNDP, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and the United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women).
19
Democratic governance
27. In its work on democratic governance, UNDP will continue to emphasize 
strengthening government institutions while also working with non-State partners. UNDP 
will support the Parliament, the Ministry of Justice and Police and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to improve legislative capacity, with a focus on human rights protection, the 
participation of women in decision-making and the design of a comprehensive system 
that gives insight into migration and human mobility. UNDP has been supporting the 
Government on free and fair electoral processes for over 20 years. This will continue, as 
UNDP is the only agency of the United Nations offering this support.
20
28. If the technical and financial support provided by UNDP are efficiently and 
effectively directed towards reaching sustainable solutions in the areas of parliamentary 
support, human rights protection, migration and support to the cause of gender equity,
then it can be expected that Suriname will be closer to attaining a more just and fair 
society, with significant changes seen in the enjoyment of human rights by all.
Social development 
29. UNDP support to the social development portfolio will emphasize improvement of 
the position and living conditions of vulnerable groups. If their living conditions are to 
be improved, then support must be provided to national and local authorities, such as the 
Ministry of Regional Development and Sports, to improve policies and the quality of 
service delivery to vulnerable groups, especially indigenous and tribal people and persons 
with disabilities. 
30. To strengthen the position of the vulnerable groups, UNDP will advocate for their 
inclusion in the processes of legislation, policy formulation and programmatic 
interventions, by utilizing its position as a neutral, unbiased convening partner with 
innovative means and approaches.
31. Poverty reduction will be addressed by interventions to enhance livelihoods among 
indigenous and tribal people, including skills-building for women; improved food 
security for remote rural communities; improved water and sanitation for indigenous and 
tribal people in the Surinamese Amazon; and improved opportunities for persons with 
disabilities through decent work and entrepreneurship development. Ongoing UNDP 
support in these areas provides a strong comparative advantage and strengthens the 
UNDP integrator role. Digital technology, innovation and digital inclusion will also be 
prioritized.
Environment, climate change and natural resource management
32. If the environment, climate change and natural resource management programme 
enables State and non-State institutions, systems, micro, small and medium-sized
enterprises and individuals to be change agents and implement inclusive and nature-based 
18 Ministry of Home Affairs, Suriname Gender Vision Plan.
19 UNFPA/ UN-Women/UNDP (2021) Stakeholder Consultation - Ensuring Gender Integration in UNFPA, UN-Women and UNDP New 
liDP/DCP/SUR/4
solutions that are data-driven, utilizing the best applicable digital planning tools and
targeting the most deprived and marginalized groups, then it should result in enhanced,
inclusive, gender-responsive and risk-informed climate change mitigation actions 
towards building resilient communities in Suriname.
33. The UNDP portfolio on the environment and climate change, the largest21 for the 
country office, will continue to be supported by ongoing partners. UNDP will continue 
to support the NCCR on disaster risk reduction in the event of natural hazards, 
particularly floods. The evaluation of the climate change project found that targets had 
been met, reaching over 1,800 community members in two districts, setting the stage for
ongoing support to climate action.
22
UNDP as integrator 
34. UNDP will act as an integrator and consolidate inter-agency efforts towards 
mainstreaming, accelerating and monitoring the Sustainable Development Goals. The 
assessment of the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, led by UNDP, identified 12 
vulnerable groups, including indigenous and tribal people, migrants, asylum seekers,
refugees, persons living with HIV and AIDS, persons with disabilities, the elderly,
children, adolescents, women, persons with mental health conditions, persons in 
institutionalized settings, persons with pre-existing or chronic medical conditions, 
proprietors of small and medium-sized enterprises and persons in the informal sector. As 
an integrator, UNDP will build on this analysis to continue joint programme development 
with United Nations agencies and development partners. 
Stakeholder engagement
35. UNDP will be guided by the principles of inclusivity and diversity and will engage 
closely with civil society groups such as the World Wildlife Fund for Nature, Amazon 
Conservation Team and Conservation International, which are consistent, ongoing 
partners. UNDP will continue to collaborate with private sector entities, small and 
medium-sized enterprises, ICT Association Suriname,23 the Suriname Hospitality and 
Tourism Association, Suriname Trade and Industry Association and service clubs such 
as the Rotary Club, with which UNDP already has strong engagement and dialogue 
confirming partnerships going into the new programme cycle.
36. Engagement with stakeholders will include representatives of vulnerable groups 
such as the Association of Indigenous Village Leaders in Suriname and the Kwinti, 
Aluku, Matawai, Paamaka, Okanisi and Saamaka Maroons tribal communities; youth 
organizations such as Suriname Model United Nations, Suriname Junior Chamber
International and national youth institutions with which UNDP has ongoing partnerships 
for on-the-ground implementation of initiatives. 
Partnerships and cooperation
37. UNDP will continue to promote South-South and triangular cooperation with other 
countries in the region and with development partners such as the United Kingdom 
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, Global Affairs Canada, the European 
Commission, the United States Agency for International Development and the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands. Interventions can include capacity-building, institutional 
strengthening or peer-to-peer learning in all three programmatic areas. UNDP will 
continue to act as implementing agency for vertical funds including the Global 
Environment Facility.
38. UNDP will continue to work with resident and non-resident United Nations agencies 
to identify areas for joint programming. UNDP will build on existing partnerships with 
21 Gibradze, Nana and Faranaaz Pahalwankhan. 2021. Evaluation of the UNDP Suriname country programme (2017-2021)
22 UNDP. 2020. Terminal evaluation report: GCCA+ Global Climate Change Alliance Suriname adaptation project
h//d/li/li/dil/the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Organization 
for Migration, Pan American Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund,
United Nations Environment Programme, UNFPA and UN-Women, emphasizing joint 
programme development and monitoring and evaluation.
39. The concept of “development with people” of the UNDP Strategic Plan will continue 
to underpin the logic of the country programme and inform its interventions to leave no 
one behind in the post-pandemic era.
40. To enable more effective and results-based implementation of the programme, 
UNDP will continue to conduct stakeholder analyses and consultations involving the 
Government, civil society, communities, the private sector and the donor community.
24
This is to identify priorities, areas of convergence and partnerships; define the niches 
where UNDP has added value; and develop partnerships to ensure the sufficiency of 
outcomes and complementarity, including replication and or scaling up of successful 
initiatives.
41. UNDP will scale up innovative and transformative advances in social development, 
contributing to the increased visibility, participation and empowerment of vulnerable 
groups such as persons with disabilities and indigenous and tribal people, improving 
evidence-based decision-making and developing innovative pilot interventions to support 
social protection systems. Its strong leadership and innovative approaches, in the context 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, are key to the UNDP programmatic vision and the nexus 
between humanitarian interventions and development support.
42. The UNDP environment portfolio aims to enable the people of Suriname,
particularly those living in rural, interior and coastal communities, to have enhanced 
adaptive capacity for inclusive, gender-responsive implementation of the country’s 
nationally determined contributions and the application of nature-based solutions. These 
efforts will be supported through the reorientation of financial flows and new and 
innovative financing mechanisms.
III. Programme and risk management
43. A major risk to the programme is the potential deepening of the country’s current 
economic crisis, despite the IMF agreement, which, coupled with the effects of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, could lead to increased poverty and unemployment. 
44. The devaluation of the Suriname dollar, price gouging and inflation in the previous 
programme cycle affected the procurement of goods and services due to escalating prices 
of goods and adjustment of fees for professional services. Devaluation also had an impact 
on project budgets and the availability of consultants. This situation is likely to continue 
if the Suriname dollar is not stabilized and thus project budgets will take these aspects 
into consideration.
45. Natural hazards, particularly heavy rains and flooding, are frequent in Suriname and 
may cause delays in project implementation, particularly during the wet seasons, and 
activities will be planned accordingly.
46. The COVID-19 preventive measures of social distancing and restrictions on 
gatherings and travel impacted project implementation in the last programme cycle as 
many UNDP interventions are outside the capital city. To mitigate this, UNDP will 
continue its work on promoting digital inclusion, strengthening digital literacy and more 
innovation in programme implementation, including hardware and software to support 
digital inclusion.
25
24 
ibdd hlkhlif hi()DP/DCP/SUR/4
47. The country programme will apply sound stakeholder engagement processes and 
planning, inclusive of free prior and informed consent according to the UNDP social and 
environmental standards. This is particularly the case regarding the engagement of
indigenous and tribal peoples while integrating considerations for the environmental and 
social management framework. Grievance and redress mechanisms will be integrated as 
per the UNDP social and environmental standards and underpinned by the UNDP 
accountability mechanism.
48. All programmatic interventions will be done in consultation with a broad cross
section of stakeholders, including the Government, civil society, private sector, 
vulnerable groups, communities, development partners and donors. Because women and 
girls have been differentially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, increasing genderbased violence and lack of access to basic services,
26 27 programmatic interventions will 
fully consider gender equity.
28 Project approvals will include local project appraisal 
committees and the establishment of project steering committees with advisory or 
technical committees. UNDP monitoring and reporting will be under the Resident 
Coordinator and country implementation programme of the Government.
49. During the global pandemic, the new normal and way of working has shown the 
relevance of technology and digital literacy as many sectors transitioned into virtual 
platforms, online communication and teleworking. However, there is a digital divide as 
many persons do not have a constant supply of energy, connectivity, modern hardware 
or software or the relevant capacity. This has resulted in digital exclusion, where the 
vulnerable and marginalized sectors of society are even more marginalized.
29 Digital 
exclusion has to be actively eradicated by programmes that foster and promote digital 
inclusion.
50. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of 
managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country 
programmes is prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations policies and 
procedures and internal control framework.
51. The programme will be nationally executed with direct execution for part or all of 
the programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash 
transfers will be used to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
52. UNDP will disaggregate data by sex, ethnicity, location and vulnerable groups where 
possible to support monitoring capacities. The UNDP gender marker will be used to 
monitor country programme expenditures and improve planning and decision-making. 
Monitoring and evaluation budget allocations will be integrated into every project, with 
defined baselines, indicators, milestones and targets and also showing linkages between 
the three programmatic areas.
53. The reduced availability of reliable socioeconomic data has been an institutional and 
developmental weakness. The UNDP-led assessment of the socioeconomic impact of 
COVID-19 and the rapid digital assessment of the impact on indigenous households 
provided good baseline data in specific areas. A common aim across programme 
interventions will be the production of reliable data and data analysis.
26 UNDP (2020). Socioeconomic impact assessment and response plan for COVID-19 in Suriname.
27 UNDP (2021) Digital socioeconomic impact assessment of COVID-19 among indigenous households in Suriname.
28 UNFPA/UN-Women/UNDP (2021) Stakeholder Consultation - Ensuring Gender Integration in UNFPA, UN-Women and UNDP New 
liAnnex. Results and resources framework for Suriname (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhanced Safety, Justice and the Rule of Law
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: UNMSDCF Outcome 7: Regional and national laws, policies, systems and
institutions improve access to justice and promote peace, social cohesion and security 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme 
outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome ($)
I.1.1 Proportion of seats held by 
women in national parliaments
(UNMSDCF SDG indicator 5.5.1) 
Baseline: 29.4% (2020) 
Target: 30% (2026)
I.1.2 Existence of independent 
national human rights institutions 
in compliance with the Paris 
Principles (UNMSDCF target 
16.a.1)
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 1 (2026)
Parliament of Suriname
Police Force
Ministry of Home Affairs
Ministry of Justice and Police
Frequency: every two years
Output 1.1: Parliaments, 
constitution-making bodies and 
electoral institutions enabled to 
perform core functions for improved 
accountability, participation and 
representation
1.1.1: Number of law-making bodies 
strengthened in the area of improved 
accountability
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 1 
Source: National Parliament, every 2 
years
1.1.2: Proportion of women (as a 
percentage of the total) participating 
as candidates in local and national 
elections 
Baseline (2021): 29.4% 
Target (2026): 30%
Source: National Parliament, every 
five years
Output 1.2: Human Rights Institute 
strengthened to perform its core 
functions to ensure human rights 
protections and improved access to 
justice for the general public but more 
specifically the vulnerable population. 
Parliament of Suriname
Ministry of Justice and Police
Ministry of Home Affairs
Police Force
Suriname Media
National Gender Bureau
Kingdom of the Netherlands
IOM
PAHO
UNHCR
UNICEF
Regular: $423,000
Other: $1,165,000DP/DCP/SUR/4
1.2.1: Number of awareness 
campaigns implemented by the 
Human Rights Institute to inform the 
general public
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 5
Source: Ministry of Justice and 
Police, every two years
1.2.2: Number of human rights 
reporting obligations fulfilled
Baseline (2021): 0
Target: (2026): 5 
Source: Ministry of Justice and 
Police, every two years
Output 1.3: National institutions 
enabled to design and implement a 
transparent system to track migration 
and human movement to and from 
Suriname
1.3.1: Establishment of a Migration 
Database System
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2026): Yes
Source: Ministry of Justice and 
Police, every two years
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Equality, Well-Being and Leaving No One Behind
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: UNMSDCF Outcome 4: People in the Caribbean equitably access and utilize 
universal, quality and shock-responsive, social protection, education, health and care services
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 - Leaving no one behind 
I.2.1 Percentage of eligible 
population covered by social 
protection floors/systems 
disaggregated by sex, and 
distinguishing children, 
unemployed, the elderly, people 
with disabilities, pregnant 
United Nations Resident Coordinator’s 
Office and UNDP, socioeconomic 
impact assessment report, rapid 
digital assessment of indigenous 
households
Inter-American Development Bank, 
Survey of Living Conditions,
Output 2.1 Income generatingopportunities for indigenous and 
tribal women strengthened to promote 
economic recovery.
2.1.1: Number of women in 
indigenous and tribal villages that 
VIDS
KAMPOS
Medical Mission
Ministry of Regional 
Development and Sport
Government of Suriname
Suriname Trade and Industry 
Association
Regular: $144,000
Other: $900,000women/new-borns, work injury 
victims, poor and vulnerable
Baseline: % of the population 
covered by social protection system
Target: (2026) 30% increase of 
eligible population covered by 
social protection 
systems 
Socioeconomic assessment and 
response plan
Frequency: Annual
received training, materials and 
equipment to produce face masks
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target:150 (2026)
Source: Rapid digital socioeconomic 
impact assessment report; Association 
of Indigenous Village Leaders in 
Suriname (VIDS); Kwinti, Aluku, 
Matawai, Paamaka, Okanisi and 
Saamaka Maroons tribal communities 
(KAMPOS)
2.1.2: Number of women in 
indigenous and tribal villages that 
received training, tools and guidance 
to improve food production
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 150 (2026)
Source: Rapid digital socioeconomic 
impact assessment report, VIDS, 
KAMPOS 
Output 2.2 persons with disabilities
improve their skills to find 
employment or become microentrepreneurs
2.2.1 Number of persons with 
disabilities employed 
Baseline: 5 (2021)
Target: 25 (2026)
Source: Alliance for Decent Work of 
Persons with Disabilities
2.2.2 Number of persons with 
disabilities completed training in 
entrepreneurship with digital 
inclusion
Baseline: 5 (2021)
Target: 25 (2026)
Source: Alliance for Decent Work of 
Persons with Disabilities
Alliance for Decent Work for 
Persons with Disabilities
FAO
PAHO
UNESCO
UNFPA
UNICEF
UN-WOMENDP/DCP/SUR/4
Output 2.3 Improved availability for 
water and sanitation to improve 
community public health Water 
installations (rainwater 
harvesting/water tank system) 
strengthened with portable hand 
washing stations and respective 
supplies (such as soap and dispenser).
2.3.1 Number of rainwater 
harvesting/tank systems installed with 
handwashing systems and water safe 
for human consumption
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 11 (2026)
Source: VIDS, KAMPOS
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Resilience to Climate Change and other shocks, and Sustainable Natural Resources Management
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: UNMSDCF Outcome 5: Caribbean people, communities and institutions have 
enhanced their adaptive capacity for inclusive, gender-responsive disaster risk management and climate change adaptation and mitigation 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 - Building resilience 
I.3.1 Percentage of protected areas 
in relation to terrestrial areas
Baseline: 13.5% (2021)
Target: 17% (2026)
I.3.2 Number of sustainable 
financing frameworks and 
partnerships for natural resources 
management
Baseline: 5 (2021)
Target: 8 (2026)
Environment Statistics report 
Forest Reference Emission Level 
2020 
Deforestation and forest degradation 
national strategy
Minamata Initial Assessment report 
National Reporting to the Convention 
on Biological Diversity
National Action Plan for Artisanal 
and Small-scale Gold Mining 
reporting
General Bureau of Statistics 
UNFCCC 
Biennial Update Report, Enhanced 
Transparency Framework reports,
Biennial Transparency Report
Output 3.1: Innovative solutions 
developed, financed, and scaled up 
for gender-responsive and sustainable 
management of renewable and nonrenewable natural resources, inclusive 
value chains
3.1.1 Area of existing terrestrial 
protected area under improved 
management (hectares)
Baseline: 13% (2021)
Target: 17% (2026)
Source: Convention on Biological 
Diversity national reporting
3.1.2 Number of districts and villages 
with an improved enabling 
environment for the expansion of 
decent work targeting marginalized 
Ministry of Spatial Planning and 
Environment
Ministry of Public Works 
Ministry of Land Policy and 
Forest Management 
Ministry of Natural Resources 
Foundation for Forest 
Management and Production 
Control 
General Bureau of Statistics 
National Institute for 
Environment and 
Development 
District Commissioner; District 
and Resort Councils 
University of Suriname
Regular: $141,000
Other: $23,700,000 groups, particularly the poor, women
and persons with disabilities
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 5 (2026)
Source: UNDP
Output 3.2 Environment, and climate 
change data and risk-informed 
development policies, plans, systems 
and financing incorporate integrated 
and gender-responsive solutions to 
reduce disaster risks, enable climate 
change adaptation and mitigation, and 
prevent the risk of conflict
3.2.1: Number of environment and 
climate change SDG indicators 
reported in the Environment Statistics 
report 
Baseline: 31 (2021)
Target: 46 (2026)
Source: National Bureau of Statistics 
Environment Statistics report
Output 3.3: Innovative nature-based 
and gender-responsive solutions 
developed, financed and applied for 
low-emission climate adaptation and 
disaster risk management and 
recovery
3.3.1: Number of Policies and 
Measures for low emission and 
climate-resilient development in 
Suriname (Development plans and 
strategies)
Baseline:4 (2021)
Target: 8 (2026)
Source: National Communication to 
the UNFCCC and Biennial 
Transparency Report
Centre for Agriculture and 
Forest Research 
Indigenous and tribal peoples’
representatives 
VIDS
The Association of Saamaka 
Authorities; 
KAMPOS 
Bureau of Gender Affairs
CBOs
Large Scale Goldmining 
Companies, 
Suriname Hotel and Tourism 
Association,
World Wildlife Fund for Nature.
GEF, 
Inter-America Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture, 
Conservation International 
Suriname
Amazon Conservation Team
FAO
UNESCO
UNICEF
UNFPA
UN-WOMENDP/DCP/SUR/4
3.3.2: Percentage of households 
benefiting from clean, affordable, and 
sustainable energy access 
Baseline: 69.3% (2021)
Target: 89.3% (2026)
Source: National Bureau of Statistics
Environment Statistics 
report/Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Survey 