File Name: SWZ-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Eswatini
Country Code: SWZ
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2020
Original: English
2008922X (E) 280720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Eswatini (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within to the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ............ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Eswatini (2021-2024) 10Framework
1. The Kingdom of Eswatini is faced with sluggish economic growth, fiscal crisis, high 
levels of unemployment, poverty and inequality.
1 Nearly 59 per cent of the population live 
below the poverty line and 20.1 per cent below the extreme poverty line.
2 The country’s 
Human Development Index (HDI) value grew steadily from 0.545 in 1990 to 0.608 in 2018,
placing Eswatini in the medium human development category.
3 However, when the HDI 
value is discounted for inequality it falls to 0.430.
4 High levels of poverty and extreme 
poverty combined with inequality are critical impediments to making sustained progress 
towards the Sustainable Development Goals. Women, young people, people living with 
disabilities and people living with HIV/AIDS are the poorest and most vulnerable members 
of society.
2. Eswatini has a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.569, ranking it 141 of 160 countries.
5
Even though 14.7 per cent of parliamentary seats are held by women, only 30 per cent of 
adult women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 32.7 percent 
of their male counterparts. For every 100,000 live births, 389 women die from pregnancyrelated causes and the adolescent birth rate is 77 births per 1,000 women aged 15-19 years. 
The rate of female participation in the labour market is 42.7 per cent compared to 67.2 for 
men, and Swazi women are more likely to own micro-enterprises and less likely to own small 
and medium-sized firms due to lower educational attainments and hence lesser formal 
employment prospects.
3. Eswatini is a landlocked country with an open economy. As a member of the Common 
Monetary Area with Lesotho, Namibia and South Africa, its currency is pegged at parity with 
the South African rand. Eswatini is a member of the Southern African Customs Union which 
includes Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia and South Africa, allowing for free movement of 
goods internally within the Union and distribution of customs and excise taxes among the 
membership. This is the largest single contributor to the revenue base, accounting for over 
40 per cent of total revenue on average over the past four years.
6
4. The National Development Plan (2019/2020-2021/2022) and Strategic Road Map 
(2019-2022)
7 prioritize sustainable economic growth and inclusive governance to ensure that 
economic opportunities reach those furthest behind. However, the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) pandemic has exposed the country to immense vulnerability related to the slow 
economic performance at the regional level and is expected to exacerbate extreme poverty 
and inequality.
5. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) will 
contribute to national goals by investing in five priority areas, drawing on evidence from the 
Common Country Analysis, thereby repositioning the United Nations within the emerging 
development context of the country and the accelerated response in the Decade of Action. 
Deriving from these priority areas, based on the UNDP comparative advantage and a theory 
of change and in partnership with the Government and the United Nations, this country 
programme will invest in the priority areas of poverty reduction, climate change and efficient 
governance.
1National Development Plan 2019/2020-2021/2022.
2 Government of Kingdom of Eswatini, 2018, Swaziland Household Income and Expenditure Survey.
3 UNDP, 2019 Human Development Report.
4 UNDP, Briefing Note for countries on the 2019 Human Development Report (Eswatini).
5
Ibid.
6
 Op. Cit. footnote 1.
7 The Strategic Road Map 2019-2022 identifies five priorities for government policy action: (a) ease of doing business; (b) fiscal 
consolidation and arrears management; (c) infrastructure, investment and innovation; (d) culture of excellence and priority; and (e) 
social safety net. It also identifies five growth sectors for economic turnaround: (a) agriculture; (b) tourism; (c) manufacturing and 
agroprocessing; (d) mining and energy; and (e) education and information and communication technology6. This country programme will maximize the UNDP integrator role8in supporting the 
Government in leaving no one behind and strengthening institutions to reach those furthest 
behind first. As the thematic lead on governance and inclusive growth, UNDP will do this
by: 
(a) Providing thought leadership in integrating policy design and implementation with 
capacity development of front-line institutions, in partnership with national and United 
Nations partners;
(b) Focusing on normative inputs to uphold human rights-based approaches while offering 
innovative “next generation UNDP” solutions which ensure that women, persons with 
disabilities, persons living with HIV/AIDS, the poor and marginalized groups receive 
support;
(c) Strengthening public sector institutions by applying an intersectoral, issue-based 
approach;
(d) Facilitating innovative financing options, technology-based solutions and innovations
led by the Accelerator Lab;
(e) Bringing to bear the UNDP global and regional networks of expertise to strengthen 
resilience to drought, climate change, vulnerability to poverty and the impacts of COVID-19.
7. Building on lessons learned including the recommendations of the evaluation9 of the 
last country programme, this country programme has identified specific areas of intervention 
that form a cohesive response to a definite set of national challenges, using a focused 
approach and strategic partnerships. 
8. Working within the Delivering as One modality, UNDP will anchor its support to the 
United Nations Country Team (UNCT) on its integrator role, while drawing on the 
collaborative advantage offered by the diversity of the United Nations system. UNDP will
tap into the diversity of development approaches offered by collaboration between UNDP, 
the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
and United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNWomen) to fully unlock the ability to address the multidimensional nature of poverty and 
inequality. The expertise of partners and the UNDP Global Policy Network will be harnessed 
to support the ambitious agenda of national plans, combining the multidimensional 
approaches of the United Nations system under the UNSDCF to accelerate achievement of 
the Sustainable Development Goals. 
9. UNDP envisages that the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 will be deep and 
prolonged. It will tailor its engagements to the pre-COVID-19 economic situation and adapt 
to changes induced by the pandemic by working closely with national leadership and the 
UNCT under the overall United Nations framework for the immediate socioeconomic 
response to COVID-19.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
10. The country programme, which coincides with the commencement of the Decade of 
Action towards accelerated progress on the Sustainable Development Goals, has been 
directly derived from the UNSDCF and is fully aligned with the National Development Plan 
(2019/2020-2021/2022) and the Strategic Road Map (2019-2022) of the Kingdom of 
Eswatini. It has been developed through a process of wide-ranging consultations with 
national counterparts, the United Nations, civil society, academia and the private sector. In 
line with the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, support will be provided through a 
combination of policy advice, technical assistance, financing and programme implementation 
modalities.
8 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021.
9
Independent country programme evaluation: Eswatini2019ppggy ppppg
leaving no one behind and reaching the furthest behind first:
(a) UNDP will synthesize the collaborative advantages of different United Nations
agencies by providing an integrator platform. Through joint programming, UNDP will tap 
into the inputs of partners and strengthen access of national institutions to specialized 
knowledge, capacities and expertise. UNDP will take the lead in working with UNICEF, 
UNFPA and UN-Women on implementation of the common chapter of their strategic plans 
at the country level to address the multidimensional nature of poverty. A combination of 
Delivering as One, joint programmes and the common chapter will harness the collaborative 
advantages and value addition of the country programme to the national agenda;
(b) UNDP will endeavour to work with national leadership in strengthening government 
cost sharing to develop both financial linkages and programmatic alignment with government 
plans and budgets for effective integration, to ensure sustainability and scalability of 
programme interventions;
(c) UNDP will deepen engagements with bilateral partners like the Governments of Italy, 
India, Kuwait and the United States, and multilateral partners like the International Monetary 
Fund, World Bank, European Union, Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA), Southern Africa Development Community (SADC), Global Environment 
Facility (GEF), Green Climate Fund, World Economic Forum and the African Development 
Bank, and build partnerships for private financing from the private sector (such as the YPO 
network). UNDP will strategically position itself to move from funding to sustainable 
financing. The Accelerator Lab will offer a platform to explore partnerships locally, 
regionally and globally;
(d) Through efforts to develop and nurture national and subnational leaders to champion 
the Sustainable Development Goals in this Decade of Action, UNDP will host regular
advocacy events, at the national and international levels, led by the champions to garner 
people’s participation;
(e) UNDP will strengthen institutional partnerships with the Ambassadors of the SADC
countries located in Eswatini. This interface will be critical for UNDP work in the areas of 
productivity and employment generation. UNDP will leverage the partnership opportunities 
offered by key regional instruments such as the African Continental Free Trade Area and the
African e-Trade Group;
(f) In collaboration with the UNDP Finance Hub, a development finance assessment will 
be undertaken to strengthen national capacities for partnerships with non-traditional sources, 
especially private sector financing and foundations. 
Portfolio 1. Inclusive economic growth
12. The UNDP contribution towards this portfolio is underpinned by the theory of change 
as established in the poverty-environment nexus10 that if agricultural productivity is improved 
through climate-smart technology, structural impediments for the production and marketing 
of select crops (sugar cane and maize) are addressed and post-harvest losses are reduced; if 
local value chains, especially in agri-business, technology and tourism are strengthened and 
made sustainable; if micro-, small- and medium-sized enterprises are supported through 
improved regulations, access to credit and energy; then agricultural productivity will 
increase, benefiting the 77 per cent of the population dependent on it, women will have 
improved access to markets and youth will have enhanced access to economic opportunities. 
UNDP will deploy signature solutions 1, 4, 5 and 6 for contributions to this outcome area.
13. Three interrelated solutions are planned to ensure that growth is inclusive and leaves no 
one behind: (a) policy and regulatory regimes for the management of natural resources, 
environment, biodiversity and chemical use; (b) data and risk-informed development 
10 UNDP Independent Evaluation Office, 2010, Evaluation of UNDP Contribution to Environmental Management for Poverty Reduction: The PovertyEnvironment Nexuspolicies, plans, systems and financing incorporate integrated and gender-responsive solutions 
to reduce disaster risks and enable climate change adaptation and mitigation; and (c) solutions 
for universal access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy 
14. Past UNDP successes in supporting climate-smart agriculture will be scaled-up in 
partnership with the Government, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations and the World Food Programme, and will include supporting farmers, especially 
women farmers, to increase their income from commercial agricultural activities through 
improved water resources, watershed management, drip irrigation and access to improved 
field-based storage facilities, formal markets and revolving loan facilities. To improve 
livelihoods and incomes, micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises related to 
agribusinesses and agricultural processing will be better linked to regional value chains. 
Through the Accelerator Lab, innovative, technology-driven solutions will enhance businessto-business integration.
15. In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, UNDP will support implementation of the 
recommendations of the socioeconomic impact assessments, with special focus on informal 
workers (particularly women and other vulnerable populations) and micro-, small and 
medium-sized enterprises. UNDP will support coordination and integration of existing 
humanitarian and social protection responses to reduce duplication, fragmentation and 
inefficiencies, improve coverage and strengthen institutional capacities. In the recovery 
phase, UNDP will support innovative and cost-effective business solutions to strengthen 
informal enterprises and entrepreneurs and improve productive capacity and competitiveness. 
16. To promote a circular economy, which has the dual potential of creating new jobs and 
livelihoods while improving waste-management, UNDP will adopt a holistic approach 
whereby every type of waste is part of a closed-loop process chain, thus creating a sustainable 
value chain for the waste management economy.
17. Towards protecting the biodiversity of Eswatini, UNDP will contribute to the 
management of the protected area network with a focus on supporting systems for integrating 
land and natural resource management that transforms the current patchwork of protected 
areas into a network, while creating incentives for all Swazis – land management agencies, 
conservancies, private landowners and tourism operators – to work together towards
conservation and sustainable economic development. Developing a livelihood and 
ecotourism infrastructure will further promote economic activity and generate income for the 
communities living around the protected areas. Regional institutional linkages will be 
leveraged to create opportunities for strategic regional collaboration to enhance tourism. 
18. UNDP will support strategies to increase the innovation and entrepreneurship skills, 
productivity and income potential of young men and women by testing cost-effective and 
scalable market-based solutions for the Sustainable Development Goals, especially in the 
areas of renewable energy and environment sustainability. This will include: (a) building 
capacities and developing skills for youth groups and individuals by providing sustainable 
extension services, mentorship and entrepreneurial training for innovative solutions that 
promote renewable energy and are environmentally sustainable; and (b) leveraging funds for 
increased access to finance by establishing a guarantee facility and security for business 
loans. The GEF Small Grants Programme will support community-led innovations to bring 
together environmental gains with improved livelihoods opportunities. 
19. UNDP, in partnership with United Nations agencies and civil society, will support 
efforts to scale up initiatives to empower young people and women to participate fully in 
economic and other spheres of life in order to derive maximum benefits from the 
demographic dividend. This will include facilitating legal, policy and institutional reforms to 
remove structural barriers to women’s empowerment. UNDP will support the implementation 
of the newly-adopted Act on Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence through improved facilitation of adjudication with prosecution and courts.
20. To mitigate job losses induced by COVID-19, UNDP will leverage partnerships with 
regional instruments like the African Continental Free Trade Area and African e-Trade
Group, to focus on expanding information and communication technology as a sector with
greater job-creation potential. Beside the positive impact on job creation, such engagements 
will create more avenues for improving foreign reserves which in turn will impact 
macroeconomic conditions.
21. UNDP will support the development of innovative, technology-driven policy and 
financing solutions to create renewable energy capacities in the country. Such capacities will 
strengthen the sustainability of micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises. Using its 
regional and global presence, UNDP will develop integrated partnerships with regulatory 
institutions, the private sector and international agencies to design policy responses that can 
fully unlock the development potential of renewable energy.
22. UNDP will advance the Administrator’s Climate Promise initiative to support Eswatini 
in defining its nationally determined contribution. To address emerging issues related to the 
COVID-19 outbreak and climate-induced disasters such as droughts, UNDP will support the 
National Disaster Management Agency to develop an integrated response to disaster risk 
reduction and climate change adaptation. This will include use of technology such as 
installation of early warning systems.
23. Regional interventions like the African Continental Free Trade Area and SADC,
regional priorities and the institutional bench-strength that the country has already created 
through COMESA, will be leveraged to position Eswatini for new economic growth
opportunities by addressing underlying structural challenges and developing resilience to the 
COVID-19 impact. As host to the Southern Africa regional headquarters of the African eTrade Group, Eswatini has real potential to develop technological solutions that can be a 
source of growth and job creation. 
Portfolio 2. Efficient and participatory governance
24. The UNDP contribution to this portfolio is underpinned by the theory of change that if 
the systems and core institutions for governance are strengthened; if institutions have the 
capacity to deliver rule of law, justice, security and basic services to those at risk of being 
left behind; and if government institutions engage with men, women and communities, 
including the most marginalized ones, equitably; then businesses can thrive and help address 
social and economic inequalities. UNDP will approach the development of this enabling 
environment by deploying signature solution 2. Safeguarding human rights is important to 
combat inequalities and offer necessary checks and balances to ensure that businesses 
promote inclusive economic growth.
25. Adopting a whole-of- government approach, UNDP will support national leadership in 
building capacities for integrating the Sustainable Development Goals into national plans and 
budgets while facilitating innovative use of Goal-based disaggregated data to inform national 
and sectoral plans and budgets. Working closely with key national oversight institutions such 
as Parliament and the Commission on Human Rights and Public Administration, UNDP will 
strengthen the orientation of lawmaking, representation and oversight functions towards the 
Goals. Special focus will be on engaging Parliamentary leadership to enhance accountability,
particularly on budget scrutiny, and develop committee structures that can take charge of the 
Goals (including ensuring development of timely credible data and reports from relevant 
institutions). By integrating the Goals into plans and budgets and supporting their monitoring 
and oversight with digital solutions, UNDP, with other United Nations partners, will 
contribute to creating an enabling environment for reaching the furthest behind first.
26. Given the interconnected and complex nature of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development, support to strengthening financing frameworks at country level will be taken 
forward as part of broader efforts to support Eswatini on Sustainable Development Goal-related reforms. UNDP will support an integrated national financing framework through the 
development finance assessment and integrated financing solutions as part of the overall 
UNCT approach to supporting the Government to implement the 2030 Agenda
27. UNDP partnered with the national leadership to design the master plan for economic 
recovery. Taking this forward, UNDP will focus on strengthening national coordination 
capacities through sector-wide approaches for planning, financing and results-based 
management to enhance efficiencies and coordination and supplement Sustainable 
Development Goal-centric data for policy reform. Towards mitigating the socioeconomic 
impact of COVID-19, UNDP will facilitate dialogue for developing fiscal policy responses, 
while supporting the monitoring and development of policy stances to the pandemic. 
Positioning the country to respond to the challenges and opportunities of COVID-19 will be 
central to economic recovery. UNDP will also support both investment mapping for the Goals 
and impact investing to mitigate risks to reaching the Goals due to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
28. A key implementation strategy for the country programme is through partnerships with 
civil society organizations (CSOs). UNDP will engage CSOs in testing innovative solutions 
and creating evidence for scaling-up. UNDP will support civil society efforts to undertake 
monitoring of progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals and international human 
rights treaties.
29. To enhance government efficiencies, UNDP will support the deployment of innovative 
digital solutions to specific areas of fiscal management, aid coordination, regional integration 
and strengthening of regulatory functions. Through the Accelerator Lab, UNDP will support 
and promote the use of innovative digital solutions to enhance efficiencies. Given the critical 
guidance provided by international conventions and treaties for building/strengthening of 
national systems, UNDP will support the Government to monitor the frequency and quality 
of reporting undertaken on these instruments. 
30. To ease private sector participation in economic growth and further strengthen 
macroeconomic fundamentals that can attract investments, UNDP will support efforts to 
strengthen the rule of law as a key enabler for economic productivity and employment 
generation. This includes strengthening judicial enforcement of contracts, protecting the
rights of investors and strengthening case management in the judiciary. Special attention will 
be given to advocating for and supporting the establishment of the Commercial Bench to 
accelerate adjudication of commercial cases and enhance the judicial response to civil 
disputes. 
31. On improved access to justice and upholding rights of citizens, UNDP will support 
strengthened institutional mechanisms for legal aid, making them especially accessible to 
people living with HIV/AIDS and other marginalized communities. This will be 
complemented with the support to establish the Law Review Commission to domesticate 
international human rights treaties and improve the country’s human rights status. 
32. In line with the national priority to promote ethical leadership and enhance
transparency, UNDP will support strengthened, gender-responsive legislative and policy 
frameworks for developing credible anticorruption machinery. A central element of this
effort will be to support the revision of the 2007 national anticorruption strategy. Such a 
strategy will reinforce the country’s ability to attract more private sector investments which 
will be critical for management of macroeconomic stability and creation of private sector-led 
growth and jobs. UNDP will support the enactment and implementation of a genderresponsive Leadership Code of Conduct Bill which has the potential to enhance the 
legitimacy and transparency of government institutions and stimulate investor confidence.
33. Across the portfolios, UNDP will support the Government to maximize benefits from 
South-South and triangular cooperation. This will include work with the International 
Parliamentary Union to improve the functioning of the legislature, and knowledge exchange Cooperation will be sought for strengthening national capacities on disaster risk management 
and reduction, especially in the context of climate change. 
III. Programme and risk management 
34. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed 
in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
35. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
36. The decline in grant-based official development assistance necessitates greater national 
responsibility for financing development using domestic resources. In this context, UNDP 
will expand partnerships with the private sector, non-traditional partners and international 
financial institutions, investing UNDP regular resources in innovative solutions while 
leveraging other funding for scaling-up assistance. UNDP will convene a business coalition, 
which will coordinate and leverage financing for the Sustainable Development Goals. UNDP 
will continue to support the Government in accessing vertical funds for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, management of environmental resources and biodiversity. 
37. In line with the United Nations business continuity plan, UNDP will utilize the existing 
risk management committee and national and subnational multisectoral response 
coordination mechanisms as key avenues for mitigating programme and project risks. The
implementation of the UNSDCF and the country programme will begin with significant highrisk exposure to the impact of COVID-19 on the overall economy. Although not yet fully 
quantified, the Government’s scenario analysis suggests that country programme 
implementation will begin in a recession. While the impact of the pandemic is
multidimensional, the effect on employment is evidenced by a significant slowdown in the
tourism sector. To mitigate this impact, UNDP and the UNCT will engage with national 
leadership in developing policy responses, guided by the United Nations framework for the 
immediate socioeconomic response to COVID-19, while also supporting regional 
engagements.
38. The country’s past exposure to extreme climate events and shocks create conditions for 
a significant slowdown in agricultural productivity. The potential occurrence of another such 
event during the country programme period poses risk to its implementation. To mitigate this 
impact, agriculture value chains will be targeted with resilience strategies together with 
strengthening of early warning systems and focusing on natural resource management 
systems.
39. Eswatini is categorized as a lower-middle-income country, which makes it difficult to 
access concessional financing and limits resource mobilization options. To address the 
complexities of the economy and the contrasting social indicators, innovative financing 
solutions built on multi-stakeholder partnerships will be applied. This requires the country 
office to ensure that its investment and seed funding in key priority areas can leverage 
additional resources and partnerships.
40. In partnership with the United Nations Department of Safety and Security and the 
UNCT, UNDP will closely monitor safety and security issues and, if access to certain areas 
is difficult or staff are at risk, will work through civil society partners and utilize digital 
solutions. This will enable UNDP operations to continue, sometimes in remote and isolated locations, while prioritizing the safety and security of UNDP staff members and their 
families.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
41. The country programme’s contribution to the Sustainable Development Goals will be 
influenced by the ability to identify patterns of extreme poverty. To this end, UNDP and 
United Nations partners will invest in strengthening national capacities for statistical research 
in developing maps of “extreme poverty hotspots” which will create a firm baseline for the 
country programme interventions on the journey towards 2030. 
42. UNDP will assume leadership in working with United Nations agencies and 
development partners to strengthen national capacities in monitoring data related to the 
Sustainable Development Goals. This will strengthen the country’s systems to monitor 
progress towards the Goals and reinforce the position of UNDP as a thought leader.
43. At least 3 per cent of the programme budget will be set aside for monitoring and 
evaluation. UNDP will systematically apply direct project cost to reflect the costs incurred 
with project management support to ensure financial sustainability. The UNDP monitoring 
and evaluation framework will be aligned to the UNSDCF. UNDP will work with partners to 
conduct joint reviews and account jointly for both development results and financial 
resources through reporting, evaluations and audits. UNDP will rely on national data and data 
from regional organizations, monitoring/human development reports and other development 
partners’ reports. Gaps in data in the results and resources framework (see annex) will be 
further developed as part of the project initiation phase. 
44. UNDP will strengthen its monitoring and evaluation systems and articulate theories of 
change for each project, with causal linkages to outcomes and emphasis on the sustainability 
of programme results. The UNDP gender marker, used to monitor programme expenditures 
and improve planning and decision-making to ensure gender equality, will be better 
integrated into UNDP programmes during this cycle, and 15 per cent of the programme 
budget will be allocated to monitor gender-related results.
45. UNDP will intensify efforts to communicate, using innovative tools to reach diverse 
audiences. Partnering with think tanks, UNDP will conduct research on targeted issues to 
inform programming and decision-making.Annex. Results and resources framework for Eswatini (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Economic recovery underpinned by inclusive and sustainable growth
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2025, women, men and youth, including marginalized persons, contribute to and benefit from 
economic progress, through access to decent employment, equitable social economic opportunities, sustainable enterprise opportunities as well as resilient, financially sustainable social protection 
systems. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF 
DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
Proportion of population living 
below the national poverty line, by 
sex and age (SDG 1.2.1)
Baseline : 58.9% (2019)
Target: 50% (2025)
2. Number of deaths, missing 
persons and directly affected persons 
attributed to disaster per 100,000 
population
Baseline:18,331 (2019)
Target: Less than the global average 
per 100,000 population
Source:
State of Environment 
Report; Strengthening 
National Protected Area 
of Swaziland 
Frequency:
Annual
Responsibilities: 
Ministry of Tourism and 
Environmental Affairs
Output1.1: Strengthened policy and regulatory regimes at national level for the 
management of natural resources, environment, biodiversity and chemical use 
(Strategic Plan integrated results and resources framework (IRRF) 1.4.1)
Indicator 1.1.1: Area of natural resources that are managed under 
sustainable use, conservation access and benefit-sharing regime (IRRF: 
1.4.1):
(a) Area of land and marine habitat under protection (hectares)
(b) Area of existing protected area under improved management (hectares)
(c) Number of shared freshwater ecosystems under cooperative management
(d) Area under sustainable forest management (hectares)
(e) Biodiversity
(f) Amount of chemicals reduced or disposed (metric tons)
Baseline: 4.15% of 17,364 km2 (720.606 km2) (2020)
Target: 10% of 17,364 km2 (1,736.3km2)
Source: Eswatini National Trust Commission Report 
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.2: Capacities of small-scale food producers (in agriculture) 
strengthened to adopt inclusive value-chain approaches in agriculture and 
allied sectors to address marketing bottlenecks and losses in post-harvest 
Indicator1.2.1: # of small holders’ cooperatives and micro-, small and mediumsize enterprises (MSMEs) supported with innovative technology and financing 
solutions to enhance value addition and reduction of post-harvest losses (IRRF: 
1.4.1)
Baseline: Smallholders’ cooperatives – 0; MSMEs –0 (2020)
Target: Smallholders’ cooperatives – 10 (5 led by women) and MSMEs – 10 (5 
led by women)
Source: Ministry Reports
Frequency: Annual
Office of Prime Minister,
Office of Secretary to 
Cabinet and Head of Public 
Service, 
Ministry of Tourism and 
Environmental Affairs, 
Eswatini Environment 
Authority, 
Eswatini National Trust 
Commission
Coordinating Assembly of 
Non-Governmental 
Organizations 
GEF, GCF
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Ministry of Commerce, 
Industry and Trade, 
National Agricultural 
Marketing Board, 
Eswatini Water and 
Agricultural Development 
Enterprise, 
Central Bank
African Development Bank
(AfDB), GEF, GCF
Regular 
$1,513,000
Other:
$21,900,000Output 1.3: Policies and incentive frameworks governing MSMEs (in 
tourism and information and communication technology (ICT)) 
strengthened to mitigate COVID-19 impact and generate sustainable 
enterprises for employment
Indicator 1.3.1: # of new sustainable jobs created through tourism (including 
allied sectors) and ICT (disaggregated by male, female, persons with 
disabilities)
Baseline Unemployment rate of 23% (2019-2020)
Target: Less than 20%
Source: Tourism and ICT Sector performance Reports
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.3.2: # of locally developed innovations/solutions identified and 
tested towards enhancing employment of women, youth and persons with 
disabilities
Baseline: 0
Target:3
Source: SDG Data, Central Statistical Office
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.3.3: # of regulations adopted in relation to Ease of Doing Business 
in the country 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 5
Source: Annual company survey exercises
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.4: Data and risk-informed development policies, plans, systems 
and financing incorporate integrated and gender-responsive solutions to 
reduce disaster risks, enable climate change adaptation and mitigation 
(modified IRRF: 2.3.1)
Indicator 1.4.1: Existence of data-informed development and investment plans 
that incorporate integrated solutions to reduce disaster risks and enable climate 
change adaptation and mitigation (IRRF: 2.3.1)
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes
Source: NDMA Reports
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.5: Solutions adopted to achieve universal access to clean, 
affordable and sustainable energy (IRRF: 1.5.1)
Ministry of Tourism and 
Environmental Affairs, 
Eswatini Tourism 
Authority, Eswatini 
Revenue Authority, 
Eswatini Investment and 
Promotion Authority
Private Sector 
United Nations agencies, 
WTO
Policy and Programme 
Coordination Unit
World Bank, AfDB, 
European Union
UNCDF
Central Bank and 
Commercial Banks
Office of Prime Minister, 
Office of Secretary to 
Cabinet and Head of Public 
Service, 
National Disaster 
Management Agency
(NDMA)
Ministry of Tourism and 
Environmental Affairs, 
Ministry of Agriculture 
Key Authorities/ 
Agencies/Board/ CSOs
Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Energy
(MNRE)
Ministry of Commerce, 
Industry and Trade, Indicator 1.5.1: # of renewable energy technologies and energy efficient 
solutions developed and applied to accelerate uptake at the local level (with 
50% beneficiaries being women and 10% for persons with disabilities) 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 10 
Data source: Ministry of Natural Resources and Energy (MNRE) reports
Frequency: Annual 
Renewable Energy 
Association of Eswatini, 
Ministry of Environment of 
Italy 
International Renewable 
Energy Agency
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Good governance and fiscal stability -public finance management, efficient service delivery
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2025, oversight bodies and government institutions at national and regional level operate in an independent, 
participatory and accountable manner, ensuring equal access to justice and services, with a systematic, participatory implementation and reporting mechanism for its human rights obligations and 
Sustainable Development Goals with a focus on leaving no one behind. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
1. Statistical capacity indicator for 
Sustainable Development Goal 
monitoring (SDG 17.18.1)
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
2 Corruption Perceptions Index 
Baseline: 34/100 (2019)
Target: 45/100
Source:
National Development 
Plan (NDP) and Sector 
Review Reports
Frequency:
Annual
Responsibilities: 
Central Statistical 
Agency
Output 2.1: Capacities developed across whole of government and 
Parliament to integrate SDGs and human rights including gender 
equality into national planning and budgets 
Indicator2.1. 1: # of gender-responsive national and sectoral development 
plans integrating SDGs
Baseline: NDP- 0
11 (2020); Sector Development Plans: 0 (2020)
Target: NDP -1; Sector Development Plans: 6 
Source: NDP and MEPD Reports 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.2: # of reports (including maps of extreme poverty hotspots) 
published by Central Statistical Agency used by sectors for SDG-based 
policy and planning
Baseline:012 (2020)
Target:6 Sectors 
Source: NDP and Central Statistics Office reports
Frequency: Annual
Indicator2.1.3: Parliamentary Committee on SDGs established and 
operational
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target:1 
Source: Parliamentary Reports on SDGs
Frequency: To be determined
Indicator 2.1.4: # of adopted legal, policy and institutional reforms to remove 
structural barriers to women’s empowerment.
Baseline: 2 (enactment of the Sexual Offences and Domestic Violence Act 
in November 2019, Gender Policy December 2019) 
Target: 5
Office of Prime Minister
Office of Secretary to 
Cabinet and Head of Public 
Service
Central Statistical Agency
Parliament 
Ministry of Economic 
Planning and Development
(MEPD)
CSOs, women’s groups
United Nations agencies
Regular
$1,300,000
Other
$5,000,000
(to be mobilized)
Ministry of Finance, 
MEPD, Ministry of Public 
Service
Central Statistical Agency
UNCTAD, UNECA, 
ILO, AfDB
United Nations agencies
11NDP and sector-level plans alignment is partial.
12SDG-informed policies and planning instruments are limited. Source: Gender Unit Reports/Deputy Prime Minister’s Office
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.5: Law Review Commission to domesticate international and 
regional human rights treaties is established and operational
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes
Source: Ministry of Justice reports, Law Review Commission reports
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.2: National ccoordination capacities for economic recovery 
strengthened with special attention on COVID-19 economic impact
Indicator2.2.1: # of sectors with innovative financing solutions and capacity 
development plans for implementation of economic recovery master plan with 
integration of COVID-19 impact 
Baseline:0 (2020)
Target:6
Data Source: Sector Progress Reports
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of dialogue and coordination platforms/mechanisms 
established to address the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19 (IRRF: 
2.1.1)
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 1
Source: NDMA and MEPD progress reports
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.3: Use of digital solutions enabled for improved public services 
and other government functions in implementing the SDGs (modified 
IRRF: 2.2.1)
Indicator2.3.1: # of digital technology solutions adopted by government 
with special focus on fiscal management, aid coordination regional 
integration 
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target:3 (Fiscal Management); 1 Aid coordination; 1 Regional Integration
Source: Reports to Parliament
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.3.2: Existence of digital solution to monitor frequency and 
quality of reporting on international conventions and treaties (IRRF: 2.2.1 
& 2.2.3)
Baseline: No (2020) 
Target: Yes
Data Source: Ministry Reports
Ministry of Public Service
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
and International 
Cooperation 
Ministry of Justice and 
Constitutional Affairs
ITU
Royal Science and 
Technology Park
OHCHRFrequency: Annual 
Output 2.4: Capacities of key rule of law institutions at national and 
regional levels (tinkhundla) strengthened for transparency, ease of 
doing business and equal access to justice 
Indicator 2.4.1: Existence of gender-responsive legal framework for 
establishing Commercial Bench developed and implemented
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes
Source: Judiciary Reports
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.4.2: % of vulnerable people (disaggregated by men and women) 
benefiting from legal aid services
Baseline: 013 (2020)
Target: 10% (of which 40% will be women)
Source: Judiciary Reports
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 2.4.3: Existence of functional digital case management system 
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes
Source: Judiciary Reports
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.4.4: # of Anticorruption measures for improved transparency and 
accountability implemented
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 3
Source: Anti-Corruption Commission Reports
Frequency: Annual
Ministry of Justice and 
Constitutional Affairs
Judiciary
Ministry of Tinkhundla
Administration & 
Development
Eswatini Anti-Corruption 
Commission
CSOs
Parliament 
Commission for Human 
Rights and Public 
Administration
Lawyer’s Association 
Local Government 
United Nations agencies 
13UNSDCF-identified vulnerable groups disaggregated by sex will be used for roll-out of legal aid services