File Name: SYC-NSDS-2012-EN
Year: 2012
Country Name: Seychelles
Country Code: SYC
Category: NSDS
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2012
Start Year: 2012
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

1 Introduction......................................................................................................................6
2 Background to the SSDS 2012-2020..................................................................................8
3 The Seychelles 2020 Sustainable Development Vision.........................................................9
4 2020 Seychelles Sustainable Development Outlook..........................................................10
5 Addressing the Challenges of Sustainable Development...................................................13
6 Principles of Sustainable Development.............................................................................15
7 Assessment of Progress in Sustainability Development......................................................17
8 Mainstreaming Sustainable Development in Seychelles.....................................................18
9 Critical Success Factors...................................................................................................19
10 Overview of the Policy and Institutional Setting.................................................................20
11 Institutional Framework for SSDS 2012-2020...................................................................22
12 Stakeholder Involvement Strategy.....................................................................................26
13 Resource Mobilisation Strategy.........................................................................................28
14 Knowledge Management................................................................................................31The SSDS was prepared by a team of experts under the supervision of a lead drafting expert. 
The team is grateful to the organizations and individuals for their support and contribution in the 
production of this document. The advice of the Department of Environment and their sharing of 
critical information required to complete this task has been indispensable. Input and comments 
provided by stakeholders with regards to the SSDS is gratefully acknowledged.
Special thanks to the donors, EU, UNDP-GEF and the Government of Seychelles.
Photos Courtesy of Terence Lafortune, Jeanette Larue, Raymond Sahuquet/STB, Claude Pavard and Foto Natura.
Page Cover: Allen Commettant & Begum Nageon de LestangThe Seychelles Sustainable Development Strategy (SSDS) 
2012-2020 is a new national instrument to ensure that we 
meet the needs of present and future generations. It sets the 
plan for the implementation of priorities for government, 
the private sector and the public at large. The ultimate 
objective is to improve sustainable development 
management in Seychelles. In line with Agenda 21, we 
had to transform the previous Environmental Management 
Plans (EMPS 1990-2000 and EMPS 2000-2010) into a 
national strategy for development. The result is a path to 
lead us to a better national economy, including deriving 
more from our tourism, fisheries, fresh water supply, 
agriculture, and recreational activities.
As the leader of a small island state, I have always striven 
to lead by example to show that sustainable development 
is achievable. We have always subscribed to the worldwide 
need to cater for the increasing complexity of ongoing and 
emerging environmental concerns. Threats such as climate 
change and the loss of biodiversity now require improved 
monitoring and evaluation.
The importance of sustainable development is enshrined in the Constitution of Seychelles. It commits 
the people of Seychelles to “participate actively in the sustainable economic and social development 
of our society”. Sustainable development represents a unique challenge, especially in Seychelles 
where land is scarce and natural resources almost non-existent. It requires taking wise decisions 
to achieve a delicate balance between the finite carrying capacity of small-island ecosystems and 
economic growth.
The National Strategies and Action Plans elaborated in the document will provide donors and technical 
agencies with a framework to implement the programs and projects. Partnership arrangements with 
all sectors of society are a fundamental practice I fully embrace. The New Seychelles promotes 
participation by all. It is an essential element of successful development. I make a special appeal to 
all stakeholders, including aid donors, to embrace the objectives of this development strategy.
The successful realisation of national strategies for sustainable development in Seychelles is a 
long-term undertaking. I have every confidence that those responsible for the implementation of these 
policies will ensure that the success will be of lasting benefit to our nation.
Sustainable development is not an option or policy choice, but a necessity for our economic 
health and social well-being. What we do today should not compromise the aspirations of future 
generations.
James Alix Michel
Pidf hRblif Shll 
pg 
threats of catastrophic climate change and sea level rise loom over 
our planet threatening to submerge most of the small islands and 
low lying countries, it is imperative for the most vulnerable nations 
to plan their future development diligently. This need is further 
amplified by the urgency for the major polluting nations to commit 
to concrete decisions and actions to stir the world towards a more 
sustainable future. Failure to achieve significant commitment for carbon 
emissions reduction in the near future may set back economies of 
many developing countries several decades, through the impacts 
of catastrophic climate change.
Seychelles has always been hailed across the world as one of the 
countries which has successfully preserved its fragile and unique 
environment, as well as for the preservation of its Creole culture 
and identity. Similarly, our nation has recently made headlines by 
rapidly overcoming one of its worst economic difficulties in its history. Such country achievements can 
only be reached and sustained through strong and visionary leadership at the highest level of government, 
coupled with the commitment and engagement of its people. It is these very virtues that are vital for us 
to confront a future full of socio-economic uncertainties and major global challenges. Of key importance 
is the need for our national economy to migrate from the current environment degrading and inefficient 
brown economy to a more resource efficient, low carbon and less polluting green one.
The key tool that will guide us on this pathway is no other than our Sustainable Development 
Strategy, which has the objective of elaborating a new development vision for the Seychelles. It will be 
the backbone of a new beginning, which will shift our country from its dependence on conventional 
fossil fuel to one that will embrace renewable energy sources and cleaner production systems, as well 
as build on the knowle dge and experience gained from the implementation of two Environmental 
Management Plans for Seychelles, whilst emphasizing development and social agendas.
Through this Strategy, a platform will be created to enable the institutionalisation of the green 
growth philosophy into our development framework where the private sector, non-government 
organisations, community-based organisations and individuals will be encouraged to fully participate 
in this socio-economic revolution.
In areas of critical importance requiring major investments, the Government will have to enter into 
partnerships with the private sector to upscale financing of such large projects. Of special importance 
will be the necessity to provide incentives, clear policies and legal frameworks, access to incentives 
such as concessionary loans and build capacity across the country at the institutional and infrastructure 
level to support and sustain this need. In other words we will have to build upon our development 
capacities in an effort to boost resilience against new and emerging challenges, so as not to compromise 
the very birthright of the next generations while meeting our own requirements.
As a nation, we must build on our strengths and achievements, especially within key areas such as 
environment protection, education, health, sustainable tourism and fisheries, while addressing the 
gaps, including new and emerging ones. Above all, we must continue investing in our youth and in, 
research and innovation. In everything we do, our human capital must remain at the centre of our 
future development.
Joel Morgan
Minister responsible for Home AffairsEnvironmentTransport & EnergySustainable development is not a new issue for Seychelles. The 1990-1994 National Development 
Plan and the Environmental Management Plan of Seychelles (EMPS) 1990-2000 together constituted 
what the state called “a single and integrated national strategy for achieving sustainable development 
by the end of the decade and century.” However, in the National Report to the Rio Conference on 
Environment and Development in 1992, it was clear that the strategy was driven solely by the 
state, as the only partners mentioned were “Interministerial Cooperation and Partnership” and 
“International Partnerships.”
In 1999, by the time the EMPS 2000-2010 was being drafted, civil society organizations had 
already been involved in environmental issues, including that of sustainable development. Indeed, 
the national coordinator of the new EMPS development process was from civil society and, was later 
elected as the Chair of LUNGOS.
Despite major achievements by NGOs however, in particular in biodiversity conservation, the 
National Report to the World Summit on Sustainable Development in 2002 pointed out that “NGOs 
in Seychelles are in fact still pioneers breaking new ground and finding and establishing their 
rightful place and role in society…. NGOs operate in a context where Government itself has taken a 
leadership role on a number of issues and where there is limited funding from a very small private 
sector.”
NGOs have now become indispensable partners in sustainable development. The National 
Assessment of the Barbados Programme of Action + 10 Review emphasized that “Increased attention 
should be given to enable NGOs to participate fully in socio-economic development…It is vital for 
government to delegate activities as much as is feasible to civil society….In order to implement this 
novel partnership NGOs and civil society as a whole must be involved in decision making in a 
participatory and democratic way.”
How can this be achieved? The United Nations Common Country Assessment for Seychelles 
2006-2008, for example, makes mention of a rights-based approach enshrined in the Seychelles 
Constitution “The public duty enshrined in Article 40 (e) has not been projected into the public 
domain and remains largely unknown and unarticulated. Article 40(e) of the Constitution says 
“It is a fundamental duty of every Seychellois to protect, preserve and improve the environment. 
”This provides a strong legal basis for civil society to intervene, so as to play a vital role in the 
implementation of sustainable development projects, both independently and as joint partners with 
the state.
To date LUNGOS counts 75 NGOs as members. Many are undertaking vital grass roots work 
whilst others are implementing key national projects. The age of the NGO is now upon us. With the 
implementation of the Seychelles Sustainable Development Strategy, LUNGOS is eager to see that the 
appropriate conditions are met, including the availability of funding, so that civil society can continue 
to be key players in sustainable development.1.1 Environment Management Plan of Seychelles
Seychelles embarked on its first environment management plan in 1989, with the support of UNDP, 
UNEP and the World Bank. The Environment Management Plan of Seychelles (EMPS) 1990-2000, 
raised pledges of over 40 million USD, and after a decade of implementation was a successful programme. 
Key highlights were the expansion of the Department of Environment; training of environment professionals; 
enactment of a modern Environment Protection Act; introduction of Environmental Impact Assessment; 
implementation of national effluent quality standards; the elimination of the turtle shell industry and 
construction of the Greater Victoria sewerage system.
The success of the EMPS 1990-2000, prompted Government to embark on the preparation of a 
second generation action plan; the EMPS 2000-2010. With the support of the World Bank, the 
EMPS 2000-2010 was prepared through a national multi-stakeholder consultation process and 
national expert input. The EMPS 2000-2010 was also further closely aligned to environment and 
sustainability principles emerging following the UNCED Rio Summit held in 1992. EMPS 2000-
2010 therefore also incorporated major global environmental issues such as climate change and 
biodiversity loss. Although the EMPS 2000-2010 was successfully implemented, efforts at improved 
monitoring and evaluation of the benefits were limited. In 2009, a review of the EMPS 2000-
2010 revealed that 85% of the EMPS 2000-2010 action plan was effectively implemented despite 
serious economic difficulties experienced during this period. Some objectives were not attained in 
relation to capacity and the report made suggestions to improve the institutional mechanism for 
effective steerage of the EMPS.
1.2 Seychelles commitment to sustainable Development
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) forms a distinctive group which shares many characteristics and 
whose vulnerability and special situation has been recognized by the international community. The 
sustainability of SIDS, in particular, drew the attention of the international community in 1989 when 
the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) adopted a resolution (GA 44/206) on SIDS, which 
later became enshrined in Agenda 21, Chapter 17G (1992). This was further recognized by the 1994 
Barbados Programme of Action for Small Island States (BPOA) and the 2005 Mauritius International 
Meeting of the Small island States. However, despite a global consensus on sustainable development, 
its translation into practice has not been so straightforward. Efforts by the United Nations have been 
driven mainly by global summits every 10 years, three global environmental conventions (the CBD, 
the UNFCCC and the UNCCD) and one major global financing mechanism, the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF).
Seychelles, being a Small Island Developing State, has played a leadership and active role 
in this process. It was one of the initial signatories to the three Rio global environmental 
conventions and has been instrumental in driving sustainable development at the national and 
international level. Indeed, the development of the EMPS 1900-2000 and EMPS 2000-2010 are 
hinged on the premise that Seychelles wishes to be a global leader in sustainable development. 
This national drive, endorsed by the Head of State at various international meetings, in particular 
the United Nation General Assembly, is testimony to this commitment. The Constitution of the ), () 
socio-economic development of Seychelles by a judicious use and management of the resources of 
Seychelles.’ 
The President of Seychelles James Michel, in a statement to the UNGA in 2008, stressed that ‘Despite 
our small size, we shall continue to lead. And we shall lead by example. By our example, we have 
shown and will continue to show to all that sustainable development is achievable in our present 
generation.’
1.3 The Seychelles Sustainable Development Strategy (SSDS) 2012-2020
The overall objective of the EMPS 1990-2000 and EMPS 2000-2010, was to promote, coordinate and 
integrate sustainable development in Seychelles. In line with the Agenda 21 (in particular Chapter 17), 
and outcomes of the BPOA, the need to transform the EMPS into a strategy for national sustainable 
development is of importance and merit. This is particularly crucial as many of the issues tackled 
in the previous two EMPS’s are closely linked to development and social issues. There is also the 
need to cater for the increasing complexity of ongoing and emerging environmental concerns and 
threats. The institutional dimension of the EMPS also needs to shift from being seen as exclusively an 
environmental matter to become a national matter of prime importance for the future prosperity and 
security of the Seychelles people.
The rationale for shifting from an environment plan to a Sustainable Development Strategy is 
derived from extensive multi-stakeholder consultations associated with the review of the EMPS 
2000-2010, and consultations in preparation for this new plan (See Annex 1). A survey undertaken 
during the review of the EMPS 2000-2010, found that 3 out of 5 people agreed that the EMPS 
is about sustainable development rather than only environmental management. The same review 
concluded that the EMPS is ‘still the reference strategic document for sustainable development 
programmes in Seychelles.’ Furthermore, stakeholders recommended that sustainable development 
principles form a core part of the new strategic plan, which should be reflected in the vision and 
overall objective of the new strategy and plan. 
In the EMPS 2000-2010 Review national experts were of the view that a sustainable approach was 
required to tackle many of the issues, in particular: population growth; agriculture; land use; coastal 
management; fisheries; and addressing climate change adaptation and mitigation. It was 
highlighted that efforts were necessary to further link biodiversity conservation and development which 
would entail a close implementation of the sectoral development plan within a coherent sustainable 
strategy framework. The role of education and its links to sustainable development was also emphasized. 
Therefore, there was wide consensus that the next generation of the EMPS should be reviewed 
and emphasized to develop into the Seychelles Sustainable Development Strategy. This entails an 
improved national institutional framework, with enhanced inter-ministerial influence, effectiveness 
and wider stakeholder buy-in and participation. Those recommendations have been incorporated in 
the SSDS.The Seychelles Sustainable Development Strategy (SSDS) 2012-2020 is an approved national 
instrument which incorporates national priorities for sustainable development and lays out 
a roadmap for the implementation of those priorities. Both the priority setting and development 
of the roadmap is a result of consultations with various stakeholders and groups, including 
community groups. The drafting of the SSDS 2012-2020 has been supported with the financial 
assistance of the Regional Programme for the Sustainable Management of Coastal Zones in the 
Indian Ocean Countries (ReCoMaP) and the UNDP-GEF Capacity Development for Improved 
National and International Environmental Management in Seychelles (CB2) Project. The entire 
project is being supported administratively by the Department of Environment and the Joint 
Seychelles-UNDP–GEF Project Coordination Unit. 
The drafting of the SSDS 2012-2020 was undertaken by a team of Seychellois experts, with input from 
thirteen thematic teams (See Annex 2). These teams consulted a wide range of stakeholders to identify 
constraints and gaps, identify national priorities and then developed an action strategy to address 
those priorities. In addition the various thematic stakeholder consultations, two national 
multi-stakeholder consultation workshops were organized to specifically determine (i) the approach 
to stakeholder analysis, (ii) guidance on engaging stakeholders, (iii) key cross-cutting themes 
and issues, (iv) integrated approaches and systems thinking, and (v) the identification of various 
institutional models for the implementation of the SSDS 2012-2020. Vision
Vision
To contribute to the realisation of the nation’s economic, social 
and cultural potential through an innovative, knowledge-led
approach, being mindful of the need to conserve the integrity
of the Seychelles natural environment and heritage for present 
and future generations.
The vision for the SSDS 2012-2020 emanates for a series of exchanges between national 
stakeholders. It reflects the vision of the country to become a knowledge-based society and to 
manage its natural resources in a sustainable manner. 
The approach is based upon knowledge development and creation – a critical, strategic 
resource for sustainable development. Innovation transcends all levels and elements of sustainable 
development. It is not only about technology, but includes thinking, practice, solutions and removal 
of barriers. The vision reflects the determination of a nation to embrace modernity with a penchant 
on maintaining a high quality of life based upon a green economy, low pollution and a rich 
biodiversity environment. Achieving balance or the triple bottom line is fundamental to maximizing 
the effectiveness of polices
The vision comes with the recognition that Seychelles cannot exist without its natural and unique 
environment, and champions the preservation of the environment as an asset for today’s and 
tomorrow’s generation.The 2020 Sustainable Develop Outlook is a compilation of observations from experts involved in the 
preparation of the SSDS 2012-2020. The outlook provides a qualitative perspective on key drivers 
of environmental change in the coming decade. Deficiencies such as unavailability of trend data 
and lack of a defined national assessment process of indicators, limits the merit of this outlook. 
The document does however still provide important insights into key challenges. The outlook also 
provides critical areas in which policies and actions will be needed to address principal sustainable 
development challenges. It also demonstrates that the effective tackling of present-day and emerging 
development challenges is feasible and can be addressed by measures outlined in this plan. The 
impact of climate change on the potential level of implementation of these sustainability objectives is 
also explored.
The Seychelles economy is very sensitive to external economic perturbations. The economic growth 
for 2010 was 6.2 %, despite a global economic downturn, largely as a result of high FDI inflows 
especially in the tourism industry. The challenge to government and the private sector is to ensure 
there is sustainable growth in the goods and services sector so as to maximize job creation and 
social development as well as minimise the negative impact of industrial development, resources 
consumption and associated degradation on the environment.
The Seychelles population increases at a birth rate of 18.1 per 1000 persons per year and the pressures 
of human development on the fragile and limited resource-base of the country is expected to 
increase significantly by 2020. Accelerated growth in tourism arrivals will also contribute to increased 
pressure on local resources such as land, beachfront property, water, food and energy. 
However, significant investment in tourism can yield benefits for the management, rehabilitation 
and restoration of these natural resources. This will indeed be a determining factor for long-term 
sustainability of the tourism industry in Seychelles, since the same tourism is highly dependent upon 
the quality of the natural environment. Global economic turmoil may affect the performance of these 
local activities, especially if there is a reduction in tourism receipts.
Seychelles has met all its MDGs with more than 95% of the population having access to drinking 
water and electricity, but it is evident that existing infrastructure will not be adequate to meet present 
trends until 2020. Food security will remain an issue in view of the country’s dependence on imported 
food, and increased pressure to further convert existing agricultural land. There is an increasing 
trend towards consumption that creates ever larger ecological footprints, including increasing 
generation of wastes in the midst of weak efforts for energy, water and other forms of resource 
conservation. Progress in changing people’s behaviour may be achieved, provided there is 
adequate policy and institutional reforms coupled with increased education, sensitisation and awareness 
at all levels. Water and energy demands are expected to increase by 2020. Whilst infrastructure 
investments in utilities can be prohibitively costly, integrated approaches such as using 
waste-to-energy technologies are likely to become more common. The risk of outbreaks of 
certain infectious diseases, for example dengue and chikungunya, are expected to increase, in spite 
of efforts to prevent entry through border control and reduction of local prevalence. Of concern is also 
the emergence of global pandemics and other globally infectious diseases. 
Coastal development and urban sprawl are expected to increase as the country aims to further 
develop the reclaimed zones and densify certain rural areas of the main islands. Mahé has 
already one of the densest coastal populations, especially along the east part of the island. Further 
expansion of industries, tourism and fisheries will augment further pressure on coastal resources. 
Conflicts will more likely arise if the highlighted institutional weaknesses and adequate consultations Seychelles’ unique and diverse biodiversity is under threat primarily from intense tourism development 
pressure, environmental degradation and pollution. Impacts of climate change are likely to become 
more evident in the next ten years. The sustainable management of protected areas, both terrestrial 
and coastal/marine, will remain a challenge in view of stakeholder expectations and problems of 
access to resources involved. It is however expected that the area of protected areas will increase. 
Fishery pressure is expected to increase as well as demand for forestry products. Endemic and rare 
species will continue to be threatened by natural and human related hazards such as environmental 
degradation from development, the spread of alien invasive species, land use change and effects of 
climate change in the next decade.
The Seychelles is economically dependent upon its fishery resources with measures in place to ensure 
sustainability. However, with an EEZ of 1.44 million km2, maritime security and enforcement of illegal 
and unreported fisheries will remain a major challenge. The uncertainties with respect to the impact 
of climate change on fisheries will attract a good deal of scientific attention. Coastal fisheries will 
continue to be threatened from overfishing and other impacts on fish habitats. The fisheries industry 
is expected to expand and other fish species may be commercially exploited.
The outlook shows that the cost of doing nothing would be very high on the fragile national 
ecosystems and ultimately on the society of Seychelles.Macro-indicators Positive Trend Welcome Trends Warning Trends
Economic
Development
• Increased inclusion 
 of environmental 
 issues in finaning 
 development
• Macro-economic 
 reform programme
• Sustainable debt 
 levels
• Reduced investment 
 in environment/
 resource 
 management & 
 rehabilitation
Social well-being • Low population
 growth
• Good education & 
 employment
 possibilities
• Land use plans
• Improved solid 
 waste management
• Focus on national 
 food security
• Increased
 urbanisation
• Over-consumption
• Disease epidemics
Institutions/Education • Reforms to increase 
 involvement of 
 NGOs and private 
 sector
• Improved policy 
 coherence and
 networking
• Poor enforcement 
 of existing laws
Pollution • Investments in 
 water/waste
 treatment
 technologies
• Maintain
 environment quality 
 standards
• Pollution for highly 
 urbanized areas
• Lack of monitoring
Utilities ( energy, water, 
waste)
• Continuous
 expansion of water 
 & sanitation network
• Recycling of some 
 types of wastes
• Water harvesting 
 initiatives
• Pricing which
 encourages
 conservation
• Increase in waste 
 output
• Lack of water
 during dry season
• Increased in
 electricity
 consumption
• Increase in vehicles
Biodiversity • Reducing risk of 
 threatened
 endangered species
• Private sector
 in volvement
• Protected area
 increased
• Conservation of key 
 species
• Improved
 management and 
 financial
 sustainability of 
 protected areas
• Mainstreaming 
 biodiversity
• Restoration of key 
 degraded habitats
• Education for 
 conservation and 
 bio-safety
• Degradation of 
 coral reefs
• Threat of invasive 
 species
• Loss of critical 
 habitats
• Encroachment by
 development
Climate Change • Institutional and 
 policy reforms
 focused on
 adaptation
• Investments in
 Renewable Energy
• Reduction of GHG 
 emissions
• Energy, water & 
 resources
 conservation
• Coastal damage, 
 coral bleaching, 
 extreme droughts, 
 forest fires Development
The wide acceptance of sustainable development as a guiding principle for the future of humanity, 
its well-being and surrounding environment has gathered enormous pace at the international level, 
especially after the recent global economic crisis and hikes in the price of oil. Indeed the adoption 
of Agenda 21 in 1992, and subsequent adoption of the Programme for the Further Implementation 
of Agenda 21 in 2002, has stimulated the global community, as well as national governments and 
institutions to address current environmental, social and economic problems within a framework 
of sustainable development. The next section will elaborate the number of elements or principles 
necessary for the integration of sustainable development in all forms of planning and in addressing 
current national challenges.
In the preparation of this SSDS a number of key challenges were highlighted by stakeholders:
The challenges of implementing sustainable development are varied and complex, but ‘no action’ 
is not an option for consideration by Seychelles. Seychelles’ unique position as a small island state 
implies that it is particularly vulnerable on all fronts. With an economy based primarily upon tourism 
and fisheries, which are in turn linked to global perturbations, Seychelles remains highly vulnerable 
to external economic upturns and downturns. Similarly, the Seychelles has a very fragile natural 
environment, meaning that any environmental stress arising from over-exploitation or global 
phenomena, such as climate change, is immediately translated into impacts on livelihood and 
ecosystem health. The Seychelles has a very advanced social development network (for education, 
health, welfare and housing), but this could be seriously undermined by poor economic performance 
and environment degradation. Linking sustainable development with economic policies in the form 
of incentives or disincentives has been shown to be an effective approach in the implementation of 
sustainable development. There is also the need to especially address the growing lacuna of financing 
for sustainable development.
The overall vision of achieving sustainable development should be re-enforced at the national 
level in terms of political commitment and ensure that clear linkages are indentified for better 
inter-thematic action. The SSDS 2012-2020 has been endorsed by the Cabinet of Ministers 
(Government of Seychelles) and each action plan (in Volume 2) features a section on 
interlinkages and elaborates an implementation framework for sustainable development. In addition, 
each thematic chapter has a section on cross-sectoral issues which highlight potential linkages across 
thematic sectors. In fact, the SSDS should not be seen as an ‘environment’ document but one that 
seeks to mainstream environmental and sustainability issues into all the thematic sectors, policies and 
other institutional frameworks of the country. All stakeholders and institutions should feel part of the 
SSDS in such a way that they are ready to take ownership of it. A change in approach to development 
at all levels is an essential prerequisite to the success of the SSDS 2012-2020. The SSDS provides 
strategic direction and guides other national development plans. It should be seen as a guidance 
document on the overall national sustainable development vision and be a reference point (in terms 
of sustainable development) for ongoing and future development plans of Seychelles, whether it be in 
infrastructure development, technology transfer or market expansion, such as in tourism.
The SSDS 2012-2020 should also acknowledge and respond to the limited human capacity in 
Seychelles for implementation. In the action plan (Volume 2) ‘Policy, Institutional and Regulatory’ 
thematic sector a number of strategies toensure effective implementation given resource and capacity 
constraints are proposed. In particular, synergies and linkages will need to be clearly identified to The SSDS supports the role and involvement of NGO’s, CBO’s and other organizations, including 
efforts to build capacity in those institutions. Indeed, Chapter 6 of Agenda 21 specified that countries 
should set priorities for action based on cooperative planning by various levels of government, 
nongovernmental organisations and local communities.
The effective establishment of systems of governance is primordial to the implementation of 
sustainable development. In the context of Seychelles this should primarily focus on transparent 
and responsible action by all parties, effective and non-discriminatory enforcement of policies and 
regulations, efficient delivery of services and adequate platforms for public expression of views 
and participation in decision-making. The SSDS should also adopt an organizational approach to 
capacity building, implying that capacity building should become more institutionalized rather than 
limited within projects and initiatives. This approach will provide long-term sustainability and support 
for the implementation of sustainable development in Seychelles.
Indeed these challenges have been reflected in the action plan (Volume 2) and seen as major issues 
to be resolved to ensure effective and efficient implementation of the SSDS.Sustainable development is governed by a set of principles developed through several decades of 
global discourse and research. It is not the objective of this section to discuss all these principles, 
but rather highlight those that that are relevant to the implementation of the SSDS 2012-2020. 
Detailed and specific principles of sustainable development are presented in each of the thematic 
chapters. Judging from the vision and objectives of first two environment management plans (EMPS), 
it is evident that the Seychelles wishes to pursue an ecologically-driven approach to sustainable 
development. Recognising the fragility of the Seychelles environment and its relative vulnerability, 
this approach to sustainability is widely accepted by the Seychelles community and stakeholders 
and impregnated in ongoing government policy and action. Ecologically sustainable development is 
especially important for Seychelles in view of its high dependence on tourism and fisheries as main 
sources of economic prosperity.The publication of the SDSS 2012-2020 dovetails into the preparatory process for Rio+20. It is 
therefore expected that issues agreed upon by contributors to this global process on sustainable 
development will not be adequately represented in the present version of the SDSS 2012-2020. 
However, a few key issues likely to dominate the Rio+20 negotiations include: the concept of 
the green economy; the clustering and binding implementation modalities of MEA’s; the role of 
international environmental arbitration – such as an international environment court, and other 
recommendations to reform or create a UN environment organization. The concept of the green 
economy is of specific significance to the SSDS. 
6.1.1 The Green Economy
The Green Economy has taken many forms of definitions:
UNEP – ‘one that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing 
environmental risks and ecological scarcities. In its simplest expression, a green economy can be 
thought of as one which is low carbon, resource efficient and socially inclusive.’1
WRI – ‘as an alternative vision for growth and development; one that can generate 
growth and improvements in people’s lives in ways consistent with sustainable development. A Green 
Economy promotes a triple bottom line: sustaining and advancing economic, environmental and 
social well-being.’2
In practical terms these concepts will need to be linked to both national, regional and global economic 
policies and regimes. It has implications for trade, alleviation of poverty, management of the world’s 
resources as it is simply not a ‘greening of the brown economy’ but an alternative path. However, the 
use of the word green economy has created concerns among SIDS, and other developing countries, 
during various regional Rio+20 preparatory meetings3. Some of the concerns include whether use 
of the term could potentially be used to justify the imposition of trade conditionalities on the basis of 
environmental standards as well as protectionist measures to insulate countries’ own green industries. 
Whichever the outcome of Rio+20, it is recommended that the Seychelles continues with the green 
economy approach (as per the definitions above), as a pathway towards sustainable development 
and thus an important underpin to the SSDS.
1http://www.unep.org/greeneconomy/AboutGEI/WhatisGEI/tabid/29784/Default.aspx (accessed 15th Oct 2011) 2http://www.wri.org/stories/2011/04/qa-what-green-economy (accessed 15th Oct 2011) 3http://ictsd.org/i/news/biores/117254/ (accessed 15th Oct 2011) Development
The criteria adopted for sustainable development emanates from the work undertaken by a 
group of experts on the assessment of progress towards sustainable development4. The study 
suggests ten aspects which can be used to assess progress from the beginning of the SSDS 
to its completion. Indeed, the tools to measure such a complex developmental process are 
still in their infancy. However, there is much innovation and lessons to be learned if a dynamic 
and learning process is adopted. The table below presents a set of ‘diagnostic’ questions for proposed 
evaluation of this SSDS.
Criteria Key questions
Guiding Vision & Goals Are the goals set-out in Volume 2 contributing to the overall vision of the 
SSDS? Can these be measured in quantitative terms?
Holistic Perspective
Has a systems approach consisting of the social, ecological, and
economic sub-systems been considered in the implementation of each of the 
thematic sector of the SSDS? Has consideration been given to the inter-relationships, linkages and potential synergies among the thematic sectors?
Essential Elements
Has consideration of existing and future trends in ecological and resource 
conditions been further researched and discussed in the implementation of 
the various thematic sectors? Has an in-depth evaluation of existing policies, 
institutions and stakeholders been undertaken and recommendations addressed in 
subsequent projects?
Adequate Scope
Has a long enough time horizon been given to capture both human and ecosystem time scales in the project implementation? Has issues outside the immediate 
locale been considered?
Practical Focus Is there a prioritisation of action and a plan which explicitly inks vision and goals 
to verifiable indicators?
Openness Is the entire planning and implementation process accessible to all stakeholders?
Effective
Communication
Is it designed to be understandable by all stakeholders and appropriate for 
adoption at all levels? Is there a communication plan/strategy developed 
and implemented?
Broad Participation Has it obtained broad representation from all levels of society? Does it ensure 
the participation of decision-makers and other stakeholders?
Ongoing Assessment Are there plans to develop capacity for ongoing assessment of progress and 
trends?
Institutional Capacity
Have appropriate governance mechanisms been discussed and agreed upon by 
stakeholders? Have responsibilities been clearly assigned and ongoing support 
identified?
4Hardi, P & Zdan T. 1997 Assessing sustainable development. IISD, Canada. Seychelles
Mainstreaming sustainable development involves the informed inclusion of sustainability 
concerns into national development policy and plans. Mainstreaming involves better and more 
coherent national policies. More efficient planning fosters technological innovation and seeks 
novels ways to improve productivity, resilience and the adaptive nature of human systems. Such 
mainstreaming depends upon a change in mindset, in approach, with more stakeholders 
working together towards the vision and seeing how linkages may be achieved to bring 
about the desired outcome with the best possible benefits to society and the environment.
The SSDS seeks to promote the mainstreaming of sustainable development. Such willingness has 
been demonstrated between various government authorities and departments, as well as the role 
played by non-government organizations. This may take the form of ‘upstream’ changes such as 
influencing policy, a decision or a new development plan, or ‘downstream’ changes such as change in 
consultative approaches, behaviour and mindset. Mainstreaming is considered a critical component 
in the implementation of this SSDS.
Whilst there is no standard approach to mainstreaming5, some practical steps are recommended 
following the adoption of this SSDS:
1. Convene a multi-stakeholder group to steer the mainstreaming process
2. Map institutional roles and responsibilities for each of the goals outlined in Volume 2
3. Identify associated institutional, governance and capacity – and changes required
4. Identify entry points for environmental mainstreaming in key decision-making processes
5. Establish or use existing forums and mechanisms for debate and consensus
6. Install criteria/indicators and accountability mechanisms to ensure monitoring and 
 continuous improvement in environment-development integration
5Dalal-Clayton B. & Bass S. (2009) The Challenges of environmental mainstreaming. IIED, London, UK.9.1 Introduction
One of the findings of the EMPS 2001-2010 Review process was that for some sector objectives, the 
performance indicators was inadequate to successfully measure progress made. The SSDS provide 
in addition to improved indicators, Critical success factors (CSFs) to effectively measure the success 
of the SSDS. These CSFs are important areas of activity that should receive constant and adequate 
attention from the institutional authority mandated to implement this plan. CSFs are built upon the 
goals and objectives of SSDS and were elaborated through an iterative process organized as part of 
the stakeholder consultation process in the preparation of this plan.
The critical success factors are:
1. Political support– the government has an important role to play and it is vital that all ministries 
and departments see the plan as part of the national strategy for develoment, rather than just an 
‘environment’ document. The SSDS should be used as a primer for national development and 
international financing for its implementation
2. Ownership by stakeholders – maintaining a long-term relationship and commitment with the 
plan is an important part of fostering ownership. Benefits derived should be shared in an 
equitable manner and transparent systems should be established to enable active participation by 
all stakeholders. Stakeholders should, in the same spirit, recognise their responsibility to engage 
in the process.
3. Effective implementation framework – an institutional framework which enables the goals 
and objectives to be implemented effectively is an important component of this plan. It is discussed 
in detail in the next section.
4. Capacity – is critical to the implementation and the success of the outcome of SSDS. It is important 
to develop and retain trained human resources able to implement programmes to a high level of 
competences.
5. Integration into national planning process – This is critical, especially when the country 
is developing its own development plan for 2020. Efforts and measures to integrate sustainable 
development principles into those projects is paramount at the onset of the planning process.
6. Periodical Audits – previous EMPS could not be evaluated in terms of their true worth and
effectiveness due to lack of an effective system of review. A specific monitoring and evaluation
function will need to be established.10.1 At the National Level
There is an extensive legislative and policy framework which covers all sectors 
is in place at the national level for environmental management in the Seychelles. These include 
provisions in the Constitution of the Republic, a large collection of laws and regulations, as well as 
specific institutional frameworks to implement those policies and laws. Within each thematic chapter 
key policies specific to that sector are listed. However, a specific undertaking to evaluate the present 
policy and institutional setting led to several important conclusions useful for the successful 
implementation of the SSDS. As part of this evaluation a SWOT (Strength-Weakness-Opportunity 
-Threat) analysis was conducted with stakeholders and is summarized in the matrix below and 
addressed in the thematic chapter on ‘Policy, Institutional and Regulatory’ in Volume 2 of the SDSS.
Strengths Weaknesses
Signed/ratified the majority of international conventions 
related to sustainable development
Wide range of environment legislation/policies in 
place.
Key strategies – biodiversity, climate change, capacity 
building, land-based sources of pollution have been 
developed.
Insufficient knowledge/ awareness of stakeholders.
Insufficient capacity to implement policies and regulations.
Poor research and monitoring framework.
Some legislation are outdated and not coherent. 
Enforcement of legislation is weak.
Opportunities Threats
To incorporate sustainability issues into national 
development strategies and plans.
Use of indicators to monitor progress and identify 
gaps.
Create better synergies among legislation and policies.
Better integration of issues across sectors.
Institutional reform to implement SSDS.
Lack of political support for proposed enhancement 
of policy, legal and institutional framework.
Poor buy-in from stakeholders in driving the necessary 
institutional reforms.
Lack of financial support to implement required institutional 
reforms.
10.2 At EMPS Implementation Level
The EMPS 2001-2010 institutional framework focused on a coordinating secretariat nested within 
the Ministry responsible for the Environment. Guidance for the operation of this secretariat emanated 
from a broad-based Steering Committee under the joint chairmanship of the Principal Secretary 
responsible for Environment and the Foreign Affairs counterpart. The Steering committee comprised 
of representatives of government, the civil society and the private sector. The EMPS 2001-2010 was 
supported by a unit created within the Ministry responsible for Environment. Although the structure 
was implemented as recommended, the Review of the EMPS 2001-2010 raised a number of issues:
• The EMPS Steering Committee was too cumbersome for steering and not balanced in 
 terms of representativeness. Participation waned and discussions were dominated by a few 
 members. As to its function, it was recognised as being more an information exchange 
 platform rather than performing its steering role. Participation was also driven by availability 
 of funds for project implementation and willingness of partners to report on progress 
 in implementation. Despite efforts it was concluded that the committee as structured could 
 not effectively implement and monitor the EMPS 2001-2010.p; g ppppy, 
 of dedicated budget to implement activities, lack of cooperation with partners, and poor 
 guidance from the EMPS Steering Committee. Without a proper framework, the unit was also 
 inefficient in establishing monitoring and evaluation systems for the management plan.
• Institutionally, the implementation of the EMPS remained a sectoral or organizational 
 matter, with little input or coordination from either the Steering Committee or the
 Coordinating Unit. Some projects en dorsed or funded by government, and being
 implemented by both Government and NGOs, did not have the oversight of the institutional 
 structure. Such deficiencies resulted in lost opportunities for synergy, linkages and
 measurement of performance. Although the EMPS 2001-2010 was implemented with a
 measurable success, the institutional coordination and oversight remains a challenge. Based upon the recommendations from (i) the Review of the EMPS 2001-2010, (ii) the various 
stakeholder workshops, (iii) the potential outcome of Rio+20 on institutional frameworks for sustainable 
development and (iv) Cabinet decision it is proposed that a Secretariat under the Ministry responsible for 
Environment is established to implement the SSDS. 
The SSDS-Secretariat (SSDS-Sec), as it shall be called, will be responsible for the implementation and 
coordination of the SSDS and will report to the Minister responsible for Environment. For practical 
purposes the establishment of the Secretariat shall be undertaken in phases, as it will involve a review 
of the existing UNDP-GEF Project Coordination Unit and the EMPS Coordinating Unit, both of which 
are currently under the responsibility of the Department of Environment. 
The SSDS-Sec shall be:
1. to act as coordinator of the SSDS 2012-2020
2. to monitor and evaluate progress in the implementation of the SSDS 2012-2020
3. to provide independent policy advice to the government on sustainable 
 development and other relevant issues
4. to drive the building of capacity, awareness and management to achieve the 
 sustainable development vision of the Seychelles
The SSDS-Sec shall have a three tier-level of governance to ensure adequate and effective participation 
and also make provisions for the out-sourcing of capacity to implement the SSDS 2012-2020. 
11.1 The Scope and Mandate of the SSDS-Sec in relation to Project 
 Approval, Endorsement and Financing
The SSDS-Sec shall coordinate, in relation to the SSDS, and where appropriate, the implementation 
of (i) government financed projects, (ii) projects with significant government involvement and (iii) those 
requiring counterpart government funding.
Projects by organizations outside of government shall not require prior approval or endorsement of 
the Secretariat for implementation, unless sources of funds include government and agencies in which 
government have commitments or substantive interests in. In some cases government endorsement 
may be required, for example the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Projects with research objectives 
will still be subjected to other requirements, such as permits for export of samples. 
Other organizations not dependent upon government funding, endorsement or counterpart financing 
shall have the option of working with or without the oversight and support of the SSDS-Sec.
In cases where endorsement is required from multiple government agencies, the SSDS-Sec shall act 
as a one-stop shop for these endorsements and approvals.
The Secretariat shall be financed through a core government budget and a percentage of project 
funds being implemented through the SSDS. The use of a percentage of the funds will apply to (i) all
government financed projects, and (ii) projects requiring counterpart government funding. 
This arrangement shall also be subject to the approval of the funding agency.At the strategic and policy level, a Council chaired by the Minister responsible for Environment shall 
be established. It shall provide direction and oversight of the work of the National Coordinator and 
the Secretariat. It will also act as a facilitator for project approval and implementation. The Council 
shall have broad and balanced representation from government, private sector, non-governmental 
organizations, academic institutions and community representatives. The Council shall have no more 
than 13 members, as follows: the chairman, the National Coordinator, five representatives of 
government (from the Ministries of Finance, Foreign Affairs, Environment, Social Affairs and Culture), 
five representatives of the civil society (Environment NGO, Social NGO, Private Sector, LUNGOS, 
Community NGO), plus academia and the Chair of the Seychelles Sustainable Development Intersectoral Steering Committee (SSDSC). 
The council shall adopt its own Rules of Procedure. It shall be able to draw on the expertise necessary 
to perform its functions. Attendance of the Council meetings shall be open to other stakeholders not 
represented and they shall act as observers. The Council reserves the right of admission of observers.
The term of service shall be for two years, renewable. The Council shall meet no less than 4 times a 
year.
The Council will act as per the mandate given to the SSDS-Sec with respect to approval, endorsement 
and financing of projects.
11.3 The Governance Level
The second-tier shall consist of two bodies: 
1. The National Coordinator for Sustainable Development shall have usual administrative
 and executive oversight responsibilities. The National Coordinator shall be an ex-officio 
 member of the Council. The National Coordinator will have executive powers with 
 respect to the proper functioning of operational level of the SSDS-Sec in matters of human 
 resources management, outsourcing and financial management. The National Coordinator shall 
 submit an annual report of activities to the Council and the SSDSC. The National 
 Coordinator may consult the SSDS-Sec on stakeholder coordination and technical matters.
 Partners who are not satisfied with the performance of the National Coordinator may submit 
 an appropriate report for consideration by the Council, which shall act as final arbitrator 
 in any such dispute.
2. The work of the Secretariat shall be guided and monitored by the Seychelles Sustainable 
 Development Inter-sectoral Steering Committee (SSDSC) which shall meet not less 
 than four times a year to review the work and progress of the Secretariat. This forum shall 
 encompass ALL stakeholders involved or interested in the implementation of the SSDS. 
 The SSDSC shall remain informed of all the proceedings of the Council through a periodic 
 bulletin/communication and shall have the power to convene an emergency forum provided 
 the appropriate amount of consensus is achieved. The work of the Council shall be subject 
 to independent audits commissioned every two years and shall report to SSDSC, which will 
 in turn make recommendations to the Council. The SSDSC will have powers to establish
task forces and working committees to undertake specific tasks and assignments. The
 SSDSC shall be chaired by an elected representative from the non-governmental sector
 and a vice-chair nominated by government. The Chair of the SSDSC shall be a member 11.4 The Operational Level
The third Tier shall comprise of the operational aspects of the Secretariat namely:
• The Project Management Unit which shall be responsible for all project implementation 
 matters and coordination of implementation of projects within the mandate of the SSDS. 
 Organisations operating outside the framework but requiring the support of the Project 
 Management Unit shall do so in the form of a MoU signed by the National Coordinator 
 and endorsed by the Council.
• The Fund Mobilisation Unit shall be responsible for fund mobilisation, including
 support for project development and grant writing. It shall also be responsible for 
 marketing the SSDS and ensuring stakeholders are aware of its role. It shall also be the 
 international liaison office with donors. 
• The Knowledge Base Unit shall be responsible for ensuring there is knowledge
 development and capture in the implementation of the SSDS. It shall maintain information 
 systems to support the work of the Secretariat as well as develop a knowledge base accessible 
 to all stakeholders. It shall be a repository of project reports and relevant outputs. It 
 shall not be a repository of primary data unless specifically mandated by the specific 
 project implementers. It shall not have the power to mandatorily acquire data or 
 informationunless it is done through an appropriate information/data sharing agreement.
• The Monitoring and Evaluation Unit shall be responsible for ensuring transparency 
 and appropriate implementation of the SSDS. It shall generate yearly monitoring and 
 evaluation reports and shall be responsible for the development and maintenance of a 
 quality system in the Secretariat.
Figure: Structure of the SSDS-SecThe SSDSSec shall be established in phases as proposed below. An interim committee shall be 
established under the office of the Principal Secretary of Environment until the existing structures shall 
fulfill the role of the SSDS-Sec. It is envisaged that the SSDS-Sec will be fully operational by the end 
of 2013.
The powers of the Secretariat shall be limited to the mandate described in the preceding sections. It 
shall not have the power to interfere in the implementation of projects in other independent organizations 
unless given a specific mandate to do so. Its powers shall be limited to the coordination and implementation of the SSDS. Although this will be two years into the implementation of the SSDS, a planned and 
phased approach is highly recommended to enable the right capacity to be recruited and developed.12.1 The Rationale and Process
Stakeholder involvement is central to the implementation of a sustainable development strategy 
as it creates the appropriate platform for stakeholders to voice their views and concerns, and 
takes part in decision-making and participates. There is sufficient empirical evidence to show that 
appropriate consultations and stakeholder involvement have led to better designed, more effective 
and conflict-minimal action plans. Overall stakeholder identification and involvement needs careful 
planning and execution to ensure that the Government (national or local) is on board, and other 
stakeholders feel that their involvement is recognized. Stakeholders can also damage the prospects 
for successful outcomes if there are strong opposing political forces at work, conflicts among 
stakeholders themselves, or stakeholders feel there are other priorities. 
Principle 10 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development emphasizes the importance 
and relevance of stakeholder consultation in projects that affect the environment and the community 
at large. Indeed many countries have this principle explicitly embedded in national policies and 
legislation, in particular, environment impact assessment legislation.
The stakeholder identification process was initiated at the outset of the preparation 
of the SSDS. Stakeholders were identified at thematic sector levels and prioritized in order of 
relevance to the thematic area. The stakeholder involvement strategy involves the continuation of the 
Inter-sectoral steering committee – a platform which brings together stakeholders involved in the 
implementation and coordination of the SSDS. The strategic focus shall be on (i) ensuring effective 
governance of the SSDS, (ii) adequate coordination of initiatives, and (iii) access to information.
Strategic Focus of Partnership
12.2 The Seychelles Sustainable Development Inter-sectoral Steering 
 Committee
The Seychelles Sustainable Development Inter-Sectoral Steering Committee (SSDSC) shall be 
established as a vehicle for wider consultations and exchange of information and views on 
sustainable development and implementation of the plan. The SSDSC shall be open to all 
stakeholders, irrespective of whether they are a project implementer, an organizational pgg
the responsibility of the division in order to implement its work programme.
It’s role and proposed implementation mechanism is summarized in the table below.
Role Implementation Mechanism
Engage and manage stakeholders at all levels. Establish a clearing house for sharing of information 
and exchange.
Recruit a full-time ‘Stakeholder Involvement Coordinator.’
Act as a platform for dialogue and cooperation in the 
implementation of the SSDS. 
Maintain an online discussion forum and social network 
platform.
Organize an annual conference and other meetings 
to discuss and analyse specific aspects.
Advise main project on issues of stakeholder consultation 
and issues.
Provide input via discussion boards and other forums. 
Discuss and provide recommendations on resolving 
potential conflicts and any resulting tradeoffs.
Organize independent hearings, discussion sessions 
where views can be aired and recommendations 
framed.
Ensure that project components being implemented 
have had the benefit of adequate stakeholder consultation 
and involvement.
Access to project database and related documents.
Ensure implementation of the stakeholder involvement 
plan.
National SSDS Secretariat through the Stakeholder 
involvement Coordinator.Part of the overall SSDS is the need to essentially define an appropriate resource mobilization strategy 
which takes into consideration the specific conditions of Seychelles and the global economic and 
financial environment. Seychelles, with a growing economy, despite challenges and vulnerability, 
has the potential to mobilize in-country resources for sustainable development. Indeed many 
companies have come forward to make donations for environment projects. Government 
contributes annually through a budget allocation. Despite these efforts, there is scope for more formal 
arrangements. Internationally, the major donors for initiatives aimed at sustainable development are 
the Global Environment Facility and the European Union. A number of bilateral country donors also 
offer support to Seychelles. The table below presents the Seychelles resource mobilization strategy, 
which will be subject to appropriate revisions over the lifetime of the SSDS. It is important to note that 
resource mobilization needs to be coupled with effective systems of financial management as well as 
an adequate human capacity to deliver.
13.1 Lessons Learnt from Analyzing Current and Past Resource 
 Mobilization
There are significant opportunities, but also the uncertain nature of resource mobilization for 
sustainable development, if the financing goal is to be realised. Resource mobilization in the previous 
EMPS was reviewed and lessons learnt are summarised here.
The EMPS 2000-2010 had a budget forecast of 173 USD million, with over 43% sourced as the 
government budget contribution. Without a revision of forecast or updates on how much was actually 
raised, it was difficult to evaluate resource mobilisation effectiveness. The Report on the Review of the 
EMPS 2000-2010 does not present a comprehensive review of the extent of resource mobilisation, 
although it does state that (i) lack of finance was a barrier to implementation in certain sectors; (ii) 
need to further involve the department of finance, and the (iii) need for proper documentation and 
accountability.
Furthermore, in order to take advantage of opportunities which lie outside traditional funding cycles 
and programmes, a continuous resource mobilisation strategy focused on a number of key targets 
– the private sector, individual donors, foundations and trusts, is more appropriate. However, such a 
strategy needs to go hand-in-hand with concerted marketing efforts and an economic climate that 
promotes contributions through tax incentives and other initiatives. Vision
Resource mobilization is a strategic issue. Innovative-driven resource mobilisation strategy that 
supports the implementation of the SSDS.
Effective resource mobilization underpins
implementation of the SSDS.
A fully resourced SSDS that meets the overall vision 
of the SSDS. 
Resource mobilization requires a appropriate institutional 
support.
Establish a Resource Mobilisation Service (RMS) in the 
SSDS Secretariat with responsibility for fund raising, 
brand building, information and training.
Need for a detailed resource mobilization
strategy and plan.
Develop and implement a resource mobilization 
framework after stakeholder and donor consultations.
Strategic options Implementation Mechanism Expected Result
Raising financing through regional 
and global projects & mechanisms.
Substantive representation of Seychelles 
in those organizations.
Large projects that implement key 
themes or components.
‘Plug-in’ to opportunistic sources of 
financing, such as grants & competitive 
bids.
Syndicated service on grant 
opportunities and training in project/
grant submissions.
Financing of small to medium-sized 
project/research components.
Specific core Government budget for 
implementing sustainable development.
Through government procurement 
services.
Ongoing support for long-term 
projects and retention of human 
capacity.
Tax Rebates and other financial 
incentives.
Revised tax structure which allows 
donors to enjoy tax benefits.
Enhanced financing for long-term 
projects. Implement actions which 
are not financed by other donors.
Environment Trust Funds & other 
national trust funds.
Project-based with a strong counterpart 
contribution component.
Implement actions which are not 
financed by other donors.
Formalise and strengthen local 
sources of financing.
Develop and integrate cause-based, 
corporate social responsibility 
programmes.
Implement actions which can bring 
about changes and also project 
visibility.
Overseas Development Aid Multilateral and bilateral 
negotiations combined with calls 
for proposals.
Large projects as budget support 
and for civil societyAn estimation of the resource implications for the SSDS is provided here. The figures are based 
upon estimates and do not take into consideration inflation, nor changes in economic growth which 
may impact on government revenue, and global economic trends over the 2012-2020 period. It is 
envisaged as suggested in the strategy that the resource forecasts are revised every two years to take 
into consideration these factors and also other considerations.
Programmes Estimated Resources Needed
SCR Million USD million
Social and Human Development 50.5 4.2
Land Use, Coastal Zones and
Urbanisation 294.3 24.5
Biodiversity and Forestry 275 22.9
Agriculture and Food Security 161 13.4
Fisheries and Marine Resources 1374 114.5
Water, Sanitation and Waste
Management 2154 179.5
Tourism and Aesthetics 13 1.083
Economics of Sustainability 25.8 2.1
Sustainable Consumption and
Production 407.5 33.9
Energy and Transport 1154 95.7
Climate Change 2486 207,2
Education for Sustainability 45.4 3.7
Policy, Institutional & Regulatory 13.3 1.1
Operationalisation of the SSDS 8 0.7
TOTAL 8463 704
Approx total per year = 75.8 million US Dollars or 10 % of the Seychelles GDP or 860 USD per 
Capita.14.1 Introduction
Sustainable development is often seen as an end result rather than a process of learning. Agenda 
21 makes several key references to sharing and management of knowledge for sustainable 
development.
Chapter 3 – Combating 
Poverty 3.7 (c)
Promoting or establishing grass-roots mechanisms to allow for the 
sharing of experience and knowledge between communities.
Chapter 5 Demographic 
Dynamics & sustainability 
5.1 (a) 
Developing and disseminating knowledge concerning the links between 
demographic trends and factors and sustainable development.
Chapter 35 Science for 
sustainable development 
36.6(b)
Environmental and developmental policy formulation, building 
upon the best scientific knowledge and assessments, and taking into 
account the need to enhance international cooperation and the relative 
uncertainties of the various processes and options involved.
Chapter 40 Information
for Decision-making 
40.11
Countries, with the cooperation of international organizations, should 
establish supporting mechanisms to provide local communities and 
resource users with the information and know-how they need to 
manage their environment and resources sustainably, applying 
traditional and indigenous knowledge and approaches when appropriate. 
This is particularly relevant for rural and urban populations and 
indigenous women's and youth groups.
The need for mechanisms to manage knowledge is critical to sustainable development in 
Seychelles. Indeed, the goal of knowledge management (KM) is one that can be achieved in practice, 
such as improvements in capabilities through knowledge resources such as skills, experience and 
technologies. The management of knowledge is vital in supporting decision and policy-making as 
well as innovation in sustainability. To enable a shift in mindset and interest in sustainability
14.2 Factors Driving Knowledge Management
Knowledge management for sustainability is driven by the following factors, which are deemed 
important in the context of Seychelles.
Forces driving Knowledge Management:
• Knowledge is becoming central to environmental, economic and social decision-making in 
 Seychelles;
• Seychelles, having a small human resource capacity, would benefit from improved 
 management of knowledge;• Integrating new science & technology into sustainable development requires specific 
 considerations in Seychelles;
• Maximizing impact and return on investments implemented from the SSDS;
• Take full advantage of the Information Technology development in Seychelles
• Institutional effectiveness through better communication and a move towards open 
 integrated and more effective networks.
By creating KM programmes, each of these pillars can be implemented across the SSDS.
The KM CyclePillar Context in SSDS KM Programmes
Leadership Use of knowledge in
Decision-making
• Establish information protocol for better 
 decision-making.
• Develop collaborative plat form for involving 
 stakeholders in decision-making.
• Implement feedback system which measures 
 and documents effectiveness of decisions 
 taken.
Organisation Knowledge drives
organizational change
and effectiveness
• Identify critical knowledge gaps, 
 opportunities, and risks.
• Develop model and processes for collection, 
 sharing and use of information.
• Institutional strengthening and capacity 
 building for knowledge management. 
• Maximise human resources through more 
 effective use of knowledge systems.
Technology Development of knowledge centres and use of better
information collection
technologies
• Investment in appropriate infrastructure 
 for knowledge collection and access.
• Capacity building programme of KM 
 platforms and centres.
• Develop links with international KM 
 centres.
• Support University infrastructure to consoli 
 date availability of scientific knowledge. 
Learning Change in mindset and
introduce approaches to
adaptive learning
• Encourage access to better information 
 and case studies for influencing change.
• Promote the benefits of collaboration and 
 sharing of information.
• Training programme to encourage 
 adaptative learning at all levels. ANNEXESWorkshop Date Objective Main target group
Inception Workshop 5th August 2010 Discuss the
methodology and
approach
General stakeholders and 
thematic consultants
Thematic Workshop 9-19th August 2010 Scope, trends and policy 
analysis of each thematic 
sector
Thematic consultants
Multi-thematic
Workshop I
2nd September 2010 Discuss linkages,
inter-relationship among 
thematic sectors
Thematic consultants
Stakeholder Workshop 16th September 2010 Presentation of initial 
structure and content of 
the SSDS
All stakeholders
Awareness Workshop 23rd September 2010 Create awareness among 
government and community 
leaders
Chief Executives,
members of the national 
assembly, community leaders 
workshop
Multi-thematic
Workshop II
21st October 2010 To present initial drafts of 
the Thematic sectors
Thematic consultants
Photo Workshop 6th May 2011 To select photos for the 
SSD
Thematic consultants
Validation Workshop 3rd August 2011 To adopt the SSDS All stakeholders
Thematic Sector Workshops
Date and Time Thematic Sectors
From 9th to 19th August 
2010
Biodiversity, Agriculture, Fisheries, Tourism, Economics of Sustainability, Energy 
and Transport, Climate Change, Policy, Institutional and
Regulatory.
12th August 2010 Education for Sustainability workshop
13th August 2010 Water, Sanitation and Waste Management
17th August 2010 Social and Human Development
18th August 2010 Land Use , Coastal Zone and Urbanisation
19th August 2010 Sustainable Consumption and ProductionName Area of Expertise
Rolph Payet Lead Drafting Consultant
Begum Nageon de Lestang Lead Coordinator
Nadine Lucas Human Development
Benjamin Vel Social
Alain Decomarmond Land use, Coastal Zone
Francis Coeur de Lion Urbanization
Denis Matatiken Biodiversity and Forestry
Mermedah Moustache Agriculture and Food Security
Joel Nageon de Lestang Fisheries and Marine Resources
Cliff Gonzalves Water Sanitation and Waste Management
Philomena Hollanda Tourism and Aesthetics
Beryl Samson Economics of Sustainability
Gerys Cole Sustainable Consumption and Production
Mamy Razanajatovo Energy
Patrick Andre Transport
Wills Agricole Climate change
Michele Martin Education for Sustainability
Iris Carolus Policy, Institutional and Regulatory
Other contributors – Ralph Hissen, Sheila Leon, Betty Seraphine, Jenifer Sinon, Keneth Tomking, 
Lilian Durup, Hansel Confiance, Terence Vel, Jeanette Larue, Lyndy Bastienne, Brenda Andimignon, 
Kathy Beaver, Alice Mascarenhas, Rebecca Loustau-Lalanne.
Reviewing: Aurelie Hermans & Cliff Gonzalves
Editing: Glynn BurridgeName Organisation
Rolph Payet Lead Drafting Consultant
Didier Dogley Principal Secretary of Environment Department
Dan Frichot Department of Community Development
Seylina Verghese Ministry of Finance
John Nevill LUNGOS Representative
Jane Victor-Larue Department of Social Development
Kenneth Racombo Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Ms. Audrey Cane Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Jacob Olofsson Ministry of Foreign Affairs Intern
Cliff Gonzalves Environment Department Technical Advisor
Begum Nageon de Lestang National Programme Coordinator / Secretary to the Interim Committee
Aurelie Hermans EMPS Program AssociateAnse Boileau District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Irene SINON
District Administrator
Anse Boileau
Tel: 256 2269
anseboileauaao@gov.sc
Anse Etoile District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Aselma PILATE
District Administrator
La Gogue, Anse Etoile
Tel: 424 1443 / 272 2813
Fax: 424 1759
christinepilate@yahoo.com
daae@cdysc.gov.sc
Baie Lazare District Administration’s Office
Mr. Tresfle REVERA
District Administrator
Baie Lazare 
Tel: 436 1306 / 272 2951
Fax: 436 1648
baielazareda@gov.sc
Bel Ombre District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Pharisianne LUCAS
District Administrator
Bel Ombre
Tel: 272 2688 / 278 3416
Fax: 424 7381
belombreda@gov.sc
Bel-Air District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Denise DUFRESNE
District Administrator
Bel-Air
Tel: 422 4318 / 272 2106
Fax: 432 1802
belairda@gov.scDistrict Administrator
Cascade
Tel: 437 3247 / 272 2201
Fax: 437 3451
barratt@seychelles.net
cascadeda@gov.sc
English river District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Antoinette ELISABETH
District Administrator
English river
Tel: 432 1630 / 272 2215
englishriverda@gov.sc
Glacis District Administration’s Office
Mr. Gilbert MARIE
District Administrator
Glacis
Tel: 426 1479 / 272 3995
Fax: 426 1404
secdagls@gov.sc
Grande Anse Praslin District Administration Office
Mr. Damien ALLY
District Administrator
Grande Anse Praslin
Tel: 278 1571 / 272 2812
Fax: 423 3071 / 423 2052
ally@seychelles.net / damien.ally@gov.sc
La Misère District Administration Office
Mrs. Raymonde BENSTRONG
District Administrator
Souvenir La Misère
Tel: 437 83 37 / 272 36 24
grandansemaheda@gov.sc
Les Mamelles District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Doris MIWALE
District Administrator
Les Mamelles 
Tel: 434 5164 / 278 3426 / 272 3052
Fax: 434 5964
lmsda@gov.sc / dodoesticos@yahoo.comDistrict Administrator
Mont Buxton 
Tel: 432 2797 / 272 2771
montbuxtonda@gov.sc
Mont Fleuri District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Flavie LAPORTE
District Administrator
Mont Fleuri 
Tel: 432 2528 / 272 2062 / 432 2524 / 278 1536
Fax: 432 4516
flavie71@hotmail.com 
mflda@gov.sc
Plaisance District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Claudette LOUISE
District Administrator
Plaisance
Tel: 434 4196 / 272 2807 / 278 1531
Fax: 434 4683
plaisanceda@gov.sc
louisecloclo@hotmail.com
Port-Glaud District Administration Office
Mr. Maizi PORT-LOUIS
District Administrator
Port-Glaud
Tel: 272 3624 / 437 8003
daportglaud@cdysc.gov.sc
Roche Caiman District Administration’s Office
Mrs. Claudette HARRISON
District Administrator
Roche Caiman 
Tel: 272 2025 / 278 3425
aaorochecaiman@gov.sc
Saint-Louis District Administration Office
Mrs. Marivonne ROSE
District Administrator
Saint-Louis 
stlouisaao@gov.scDistrict Administrator
Takamaka
Tel: 436 6321 / 272 2416 / 436 6368
datakamaka@cdysc.gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mr. Didier DOGLEY
Principal Secretary
Botanical garden, P.O Box 445, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0500 
d.dogley@env.gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mr. Flavien JOUBERT
Director General of Wildlife Enforcement and Permit Division 
Botanical garden, P.O Box 445, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0500 / 272 2890
Fax: 461 0648
f.joubert@env.gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mrs. Marie-Alise ROSETTE 
Assistant Project Officer
Wildlife and Enforcement Permit Division, Environment Assessment and Permit Section
Botanical garden, P.O Box 445, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0575
m.rosette@env.gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mrs. Marie-May JEREMIE
Director of Environmental Impact Assessment
Wildlife and Enforcement Permit Division, Environment Assessment and Permit Section 
Botanical garden, P.O Box 445, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0549 / 467 0570
m.mjeremie@env.gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mrs. Jeanette LARUE
Director General of Public Education and Community Outreach Division
Botanical garden, PO Box 445, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0500 / 272 3997 / 252 2594
jeanettelarue@hotmail.com
j.larue@env.gov.scProgramme Development Officer
Public Education and Community Outreach Division
Botanical garden, P.O Box 445, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0534 / 272 3144
brenda_andimignon@hotmail.com
Department of Environment
Mr. Alain DE COMMARMOND
Director General Planning, Policy and Risk Management Division
Global Village Complex, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0470 / 272 2980
Fax: 461 0131
a.deco@env.gov.sc / adecommarmond@gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mr. Wills AGRICOLE
Director General of Climate and Environmental Services Division
P.O Box 1145, English River, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0431 (or 29) / 271 4419
Fax: 461 0647
w.agricole@meteo.gov.sc / wagricole1957@gmail.com / w.agricole@env.gov.sc
Department of Environment
Mr. Pugazhendhi MURUGAIYAN
Senior Project Officer
Climate and Environmental Services Division, Environmental Engineering and Wetland Section
P.O Box 1145, English River, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0443 / 272 2159 / Fax: 461 0647
p.murugaiyan@env.gov.sc
Department of Investment & Industries
Mrs. Lucy ATHANASIUS
Principal Secretary 
Oceangate House Annex, P.O Box 731, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 6200
lathanasius@gov.sc
Department of Natural Resources
Mr. Michael NALLETAMBY
Principal Secretary
Independence House, P.O Box 166, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 6411
mnalletamby@gov.scConsultant for SSDS 2020 for the thematic: “Fisheries and Marine Resources”
P.O Box 82, Le Cap, Mahé
Tel: 437 6233 / 251 3118
jnageon@seychelles.net
Independent Consultant
Mr. Gerys COLE
Consultant for SSDS 2020 for the thematic: “Sustainable Consumption and Production”
Mont Buxton
Tel: 278 2971
mcole3565@gmail.com
Independent Consultant
Mrs. Mia DUNFORD
Independent Consultant
P.O Box 14, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 424 8487 / 251 4000
mia.dunford@gmail.com
Island Development Company
Mr. Paul JEAN-LOUIS
P.O Box 638, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 272 6481
jeanlouis@idc.sc
Island Development Company
Mr. Ronny RENAUD
Deputy Chief Executive Officer
P.O Box 638 Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 271 14 43
Fax: 422 44 67
ronny@idc.sc
Liaison Unit for Non Governmental Organization in Seychelles (LUNGOS)
Mr. Viral DHANJEE
LUNGOS Representative 
P.O. Box 268 Union Vale
Tel: 252 4800 / 271 8800
technoglass@hotmail.co.uk
Marine Conservation Society of Seychelles (MCSS)
Mr. David ROWAT
Chairman MCSS
Tel: 426 1511 / 251 3671
david@mcss.scMCSS Representative 
jnevill@seychelles.net
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Mr. Hansel CONFIANCE
Senior Economist
Maison Queau de Quincy, P.O Box 656, Mont-Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 428 35 86 / 272 32 24
hconfiance@mfa.gov.sc
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Economist
Mr. Nicolas D’OFFAY
Maison Ocean de Quincy, P.O Box 656, Mont-Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 428 3500 / 272 3218
ndoffay@mfa.gov.sc
Ministry of Health
Mr. Jude GEDEON
Chief Medical Officer
Victoria Hospital, P.O Box 52, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 438 8000
jgedeon@health.gov.sc
Ministry of Land Use and Housing
Mr. Francis COEUR DE LION
Director of Geographical Information System unit
C/O Ministry of Land Use and Housing, P.O Box 199 Victoria, Mahé
Tel: 428 4502 / 272 2754
fcoeurdelion@mluh.gov.sc 
National Botanical Garden Foundation
Mr. Peter ESTICO
Manager for National Botanical Garden Foundation
Botanical gardens, P.O Box 166, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 272 3736
pestico@nbgf.sc
National Bureau of Statistics
Mr. Michel J. MELLIE
Principal statistician
Caravelle House P.O Box 206, Mahé, Seychelles
461 16 68 / 272 32 50
Fax: 422 53 39
michel@nbs.gov.scStakeholder and Community action coordinator
Roche Caiman, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 460 1127
martin@natureseychelles.org
Planning Authority
Mr. Gerard HOAREAU
Chairman of Planning Authority
Independence House, P.O. Box 199
Tel: 428 4444 / 422 5187
ghoareau@mluh.gov.sc
Plant Conservation Action (PCA)
Mrs. Katy BEAVER
PCA Representative
P.O Box 392 Victoria
Tel: 424 1104 / 257 4619
kbeaver@seychelles.net
Plant Conservation Action
Mr. Lindsay CHONG-SENG
PCA Representative
P.O Box 392 Victoria
Tel: 424 1104 / 251 4451
lindsay0kate@hotmail.com
Programme Coordination Unit
Mrs. Danielle DUGASSE
Biosecurity Project Manager
GOS/UNDP/GEF/PCU, Les Palmes Building, Second Floor, P.O Box 310, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 422 5914 / 258 3656
d.dugasse@pcusey.sc
Programme Coordination Unit
Mr. Joseph Rath
Capacity Building Development for Improved National and International Environmental
Management in Seychelles Project Manager
GOS/UNDP/GEF/PCU Orion Mall, P.O Box 310, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 432 5599
j.rath@pcusey.scStrengthening Protected Areas System through NGO management modalities’ Project Manager
GOS/UNDP/GEF/PCU Orion Mall, P.O Box 310, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 251 4182 / 432 5599
m.etienne@pcusey.sc
Programme Coordination Unit
Mrs. Patricia BAQUERO
Sustainable Land Management Programme Manager
GOS/UNDP/GEF/PCU, Les Palmes Building, Second Floor, P.O Box 310, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 422 5914 / 271 0888
p.baquero@pcusey.sc
Programme Coordination Unit
Mrs. Veronique HERMINIE
Programme Coordinator
GOS/UNDP/GEF/PCU, Les Palmes Building, Second Floor, P.O Box 310, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 422 5914
v.herminie@pcusey.sc
Seychelles Energy Commission
Mr. Andrew JEAN-LOUIS
Chief Executive Officer 
Room 205, AARTI Chambers, Mont-Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 272 3859
ajean-louis@sec.sc
Seychelles Energy Commission
Mr. Mamy RAZANAJATOVO
Room 205, AARTI Chambers, Mont-Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 442 1700 / 259 3560 
mamyrazanajatovo@yahoo.fr / mrazanajatovo@sec.sc
Seychelles Fishing Authority
Mrs. Elisa SOCRATE
Fisheries Administrator
P.O Box 449 Fishing Port, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 0300 (or 35) / 259 1075
esocrate@sfa.sc
Seychelles Island Foundation
Dr. Frauke FLEISCHER-DOGLEY
Chief Executive Officer 
La Ciotat Building, Mont-Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 432 1735 / 271 2377
ceo@sif.scProject Officer
La Ciotat Building, Mont Fleuri, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 432 1735 / 251 4833
wilna@sif.sc
Seychelles National Parks Authority
Mr. Denis MATATIKEN
Chief Executive Officer
P.O Box 1240, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 422 5114 / 227 2317
Fax: 422 43 88
boga@seychelles.net
Seychelles Ports Authority
Mrs. Lina HOAREAU
Corporate Services Manager
C/O Seychelles Ports Authority Mahé Quay, P.O Box 47 Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 429 4712 / 272 3777 / Fax: 422 40 04
corporate@seychellesports.sc
Seychelles Revenue Commission
Mrs. Sharon ORPHEE
Corporate Planning and Research Coordinator
Seychelles Revenue Commission, Orion Mall, P.O Box 50, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 429 3737
Fax: 422 5565
sharon.orphee@src.gov.sc
Seychelles Investment Bureau
Mr. Roger DENOUSSE
Technical Director
Caravelle House, P.O Box 1167, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 429 5500
rdenousse@sib.gov.sc
Seychelles Public Transport Corporation
Mrs. Veronique LAPORTE
Chief Executive Officer
Head office, P.O Box 610, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 428 0280
Fax: 432 2425
veronique.laporte@sptc.scManager Tender and Product Enhancement Section
Bel Ombre, P.O Box 1262, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 1328 / 272 4227
Fax: 467 1328
philomena.h@seychelles.com / holfilo@yahoo.co.uk
Seychelles Tourism Board
Ms. Betty SERAPHINE
Environmental Coordinator (Policy and International Cooperation)
Bel Ombre, P.O Box 1262, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 1300
Fax: 462 0620
betty.s@seychelles.com
Seychelles Tourism Board
Mr. Keneth TOMKING
Officer Quality and Standard and Product Enhancement
Bel Ombre, P.O Box 1262, Victoria, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 467 1300
Fax: 462 0620
keneth.t@seychelles.com
Sustainability for Seychelles
Mrs. Iris CAROLUS
Chairperson
C/O LWMA ex English River Clinic, P.O Box 900, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 251 1292
carolusiris@yahoo.co.uk
Sustainability for Seychelles
Mrs. Michele MARTIN
Secretary
C/O LWMA ex English River Clinic, P.O Box 900, Mahé, Seychelles
Tel: 32 4334 / 251 9135
martinzanlwi@yahoo.comBPOA Barbados Programme of Action for Small Island States
CB2 Capacity Building Development project for Improved National and International 
 Environmental Management in Seychelles
CBD Convention on Biological Diversity
CBO Community Based Organisation
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CFS Critical Success Factors
DG Director General
EEZ Exclusive Economic Zone
EMPS Environment Management Plan 
EU European Union
FDI Foreign Direct Investment
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEF Global Environment Facility
IISD International Institute for Sustainable Development
IOC Indian Ocean Commission
IT Information Technology
KM Knowledge Management
LUNGOS Liaison Unit for Non-Governmental Organisations in Seychelles
MDG Millennium Development Goals
MEA Multilateral Environmental Agreements
MOU Memorandum Of Understanding
NGO Non-government Organization
ReCoMaP Regional Coastal Management Programme of the Indian Ocean
RMS Resource Mobilisation Service
SCR Seychelles Rupees 
SIDS Small Island Developing States
SSDD Seychelles Sustainable Development Division
SSDS Seychelles Sustainable Development Strategy
SSDSC Seychelles Sustainable Development inter-sectoral Steering Committee
SWOT Strength Weakness Opportunity Threat
UK United Kingdom
UNCCD United Nations Conventions to Combat Desertification
UNCED United Nations Conference on Environment & Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme
UNGA United Nations General Assembly 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USD United States Dollars
WRI World Resources Institute