File Name: SYR-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Syria
Country Code: SYR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6 to 10 June 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
26 April 2022
Original: English
2206266X (E) 040522
 
Annual session 2022
6 to 10 June 2022, New York
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Syrian Arab 
Republic (2022–2024)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Strategic Framework........................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ........................................................................................ 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for the Syrian Arab Republic (2022–2024)……………………… 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Strategic Framework1
1. Protracted humanitarian crisis has inflicted severe social, economic and environmental damage 
and adversely impacted human development in the Syrian Arab Republic, as evidenced by a 
significant drop in the Human Development Index from 0.672 in 2010 to 0.567 in 2020. In 2022, 
14.6 million people in the country are estimated to be in need of humanitarian assistance, an increase 
of 32 per cent compared to 2020.
2 The cumulative impact of the humanitarian crisis is expected to 
worsen as a result of negative or sluggish growth, reduced fiscal space, high rates of inflation and 
currency depreciation,
3
exacerbated by the financial crisis in Lebanon, the ongoing coronavirus 
disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the lingering effects of a drought. While relative price stability 
and a gradual rise in incomes had led for the first time since 2011 to modest growth in gross domestic 
product during 2017–2018, economic recovery has been hampered by the ongoing humanitarian
crisis and diverse internal and external factors. These dynamics are expected to lead to an increase 
in the poverty rate, with significant regional disparities.
4
2. The damage and destruction of the basic services infrastructure has severely impacted equitable 
access to essential services, with a disproportionate effect on crisis-affected and vulnerable 
populations. The capacities of subnational and local administrative units, which play a key role in
addressing community challenges, have been weakened by a decade of humanitarian crisis.5 Access 
to quality basic health care, education, water and sanitation and other municipal services has been 
further affected by weakened local institutional capacities and community engagement. Poverty is 
aggravated by a weakened social protection framework for the vulnerable population. Challenges 
include the provision of civil documentation and the management of housing, land and property 
records and transactions. This has particularly affected the ability of female-headed households, 
returnees, internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees to access social protection and
employment opportunities and avail of entitlements and property. The revitalization of public service 
provision in a context-sensitive and participatory manner that supports voluntary, safe, informed and 
dignified return, reintegration and social cohesion in communities will require an integrated and 
more coordinated approach among relevant partners. 
3. The humanitarian crisis also led to large-scale migration and displacement (5.6 million 
registered Syrian refugees6and 6.7 million IDPs),
7
resulting in the loss of qualified human resources. 
Destruction of livelihoods has impoverished large segments of the population, particularly the most 
vulnerable, including women, youth and people with disabilities (the latter comprise 28 per cent of 
the population).8 Youth unemployment is more than double the national average at 60.2 per cent9
and the ratio of female to male unemployment was 3:1 in 2019.10 The increase in female-headed 
households (from 4.4 per cent in 2009 to 14 per cent in 2019)11 has created an added economic and 
social burden on women. The scarcity of livelihood opportunities has disproportionately driven 
women and youth to informal sector jobs that pay poorly and offer no protection.12
4. Rapid economic downturn from late 2019 onwards has significantly impacted micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), considered the backbone of the Syrian economy. MSMEs had 
1 The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has expressed reservations about the numbers and some reports included in this document as they are not 
based on national sources.
2 Humanitarian Needs Overview 2022.
3 According to the Humanitarian Needs Overview 2022, since the onset of the humanitarian crisis in 2011, the Syrian economy has shrunk by more than 
half and the Syrian pound has undergone a 70-fold depreciation.
4 Syrian Arab Republic, The First National Report on Sustainable Development Goals, 2019.
5 Elements of this approach are present in Law 107 of 2011.
6 The new United Nations Strategic Framework 2022-2024. According to the Central Bureau of Statistics, as of 2019, refugees were estimated at 4.3 
million.
7 https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/operations/stima/idps-tracking and the new United Nations Strategic Framework 2022–2024. According to 
the Syrian Government, the number of IDPs is estimated at 4 million. Source: Central Bureau of Statistics. 
8 United Nations Humanitarian Needs Assessment Programme, ‘Disability: Prevalence and Impact’, Damascus, 2019.
9 Central Bureau of Statistics.
10 Central Bureau of Statistics.
11 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and World Food Programme, Special Report: Crop and Food Security Assessment
Mission to the Syrian Arab Republic, Rome 2020.
12 UNDP, Human Development Report 2019, Beyond income, beyond averages, beyond today: Inequalities in human development in the 21st century.already been suffering from crisis-induced gaps in human capital and skills; limited access to 
finance; loss of productive assets; and an ecosystem that is not conducive to private sector growth 
and investment. Weakened capacity to regulate the economy, inefficient administration and 
challenges in efforts to combat corruption have become additional challenges.13
5. The humanitarian crisis has also worsened economic and social disparities related to area, 
gender, age and disability. In other crisis settings, such disparities – when left unaddressed – have 
weakened social cohesion. Dramatic loss of rural livelihoods has continued to drive urbanization,
affecting an estimated three quarters of the population,14 aggravating social pressures in urban 
settings. Strengthening social cohesion is critical to minimize the impact of negative coping 
mechanisms that result from the loss of livelihoods, like a rise in crime, child labour and early 
marriages, particularly affecting young girls. 
6. Environmental degradation and climate change have heightened economic and social 
vulnerabilities. The country has emerged as a hotspot for climate change, with more frequent and 
severe droughts and climate-induced disasters. This has worsened water insecurity and rural-tourban displacement, which were already destabilizing factors at the onset of the humanitarian crisis. 
While natural resource degradation, pollution and exposure to natural disasters predate the current 
humanitarian crisis, these factors have been aggravated by the massive destruction of energy and 
water infrastructures, overuse of fragile ecosystems and natural resources, the impact of hazardous 
waste and debris and depleted forests. The 2021 water crisis along the Euphrates River has 
threatened the livelihoods of approximately 5 million people, demonstrating the potentially highly 
destabilizing impact of declining access to water. A resilient recovery will require improved 
subnational environmental governance, with community engagement and greater empowerment in 
addressing and mitigating the impact of climate change, promoting sustainable energy and natural 
resource management.
7. Addressing the multifaceted challenges in the Syrian Arab Republic requires a strategic,
collective response by the United Nations system as reflected in the United Nations Strategic 
Framework (UNSF) 2022–2024. The UNSF focuses on four priority areas anchored in the 
humanitarian-development-peace nexus15 and aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals: 
(a) availability and access to basic and social services (Goals 2−7, 9−11 and 16); (b) sustainable 
socioeconomic recovery (Goals 1−2, 5−11, 13 and 15); (c) enabling environment for a resilient 
return (Goals 1, 2, 4−7, 10−11 and 16−17); and (d) people’s resilience and institutional 
responsiveness (Goals 3−7, 10−11 and 16). 
8. The UNSF aims to strengthen the collective work of the United Nations in the Syrian Arab 
Republic. The Organization has taken note of the Government’s Strategic Plan: Syria 2030, which 
is built around four interlinked strategic pillars: (a) institutional construction and integrity 
enhancement; (b) infrastructure development and renovation; (c) growth and development (balanced 
and sustainable); and (d) human development (social, educational and cultural formation). The 
United Nations has noted the Government’s intention to align policies with the Sustainable 
Development Goals, reflected in the Government’s presentation of its first voluntary national review 
report to the high-level political forum on sustainable development in July 2020.
9. The country programme is aligned to the UNSF, which articulates collective outcomes based 
on agencies’ comparative advantages and synergies. The UNDP contributions to the UNSF reflect 
the unique value proposition it brings to the United Nations system, in the context of the “Next
Generation” UNDP. Contributing to the UNSF, UNDP will: (a) apply an integrated cross-sectoral 
approach, building complementarities between United Nations agencies and acting as a connector
around resilience and early recovery in the Humanitarian Response Plan to address socioeconomic 
challenges, promote life-saving and life-sustaining solutions, including in the context of immediate 
response and medium- to longer-term recovery from COVID-19; (b) leverage innovation for new 
approaches and solutions; (c) support participatory and inclusive local governance to strengthen 
13 The new United Nations Strategic Framework 2022–2024.
14 Up from 51 per cent in 2010 https://unhabitat.org/syria-urban-statistics
15 https://www
unorg/ecosoc/en/node/14973644provision of basic services; and (d) facilitate the formulation and implementation of community 
resilience and recovery plans, localizing the Sustainable Development Goals on the basis of analysis 
and needs of local context.
10. The independent country programme evaluation in 2020 confirmed that despite a volatile 
operating environment and contextual challenges, UNDP contributed to the most significant 
priorities of local-level recovery and resilience in a limited programming space with constrained 
options to deliver results consistent with its mandate. The evaluation confirmed the relevance and 
impact of UNDP interventions to rehabilitate and restore infrastructure for essential basic service 
delivery, as well as inclusive livelihood interventions and economic revitalization, youth 
employment and entrepreneurship. The evaluation found evidence of concrete gains in applying 
pilots for area-based approaches and suggested that UNDP build upon these pilots and reinforce 
participatory and responsive local governance,
16 provide more effective public service delivery and
improve livelihood opportunities with the potential to enhance social cohesion. 
11. The evaluation recommended that the future country programme adequately address 
environmental and climate change considerations and leverage integrated solutions to work with 
relevant partners on localizing the Sustainable Development Goals as a driver for local governance, 
social cohesion and development innovations at the subnational level. To maintain its relevance, 
UNDP will continue to provide high-level advice and expertise in these areas. Monitoring and 
evaluation of gender-related outcomes will be enhanced17 to obtain insights into the country office’s 
gender mainstreaming efforts. 
12. Taking into account the evidence gathered, the lessons learned and its comparative advantage, 
UNDP has identified a series of key entry points that contribute to the integrated United Nations
response outlined in the UNSF. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
13. Recognizing the political realities of working in the Syrian Arab Republic, the overarching goal 
of UNDP is to strengthen the foundations for future sustainable peace and development to improve 
the quality of life of all Syrians, especially those currently left furthest behind, including women, 
youth, persons with disabilities, female-headed households, IDPs, returnees and host communities, 
prioritizing worst-affected areas. Considering the main challenges impeding recovery, namely 
contracting socioeconomic opportunities, collapsing essential services and weakened local 
governance capacities, environmental degradation and climate change, the country programme will 
focus on the three priorities outlined below. These priorities must be pursued simultaneously as they 
are mutually interdependent; one cannot be achieved without progress in the other. 
14. The country programme is anchored in the UNSF, the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025 and the 
Sustainable Development Goals and operates fully in line with the current “Parameters and 
Principles of UN Assistance in Syria”18. UNDP will prioritize its “resilience” signature solution, 
which is in line with its leadership of the resilience pillar of the Humanitarian Response Plan, which 
includes coordinating the early recovery and livelihoods sector. Within the framework of resilience 
and with a focus on the community level, UNDP will seek to reduce poverty and inequality, improve 
local governance, address environmental and energy hurdles to recovery and ensure that women and 
girls are being empowered across these areas. 
15. UNDP will adopt a context-sensitive, area-based approach to address complex and interlinked 
development challenges and their root causes, all while strengthening social cohesion. This entails 
the design, implementation and monitoring of resilience programmes through an inclusive, rightsbased and participatory approach that promotes community ownership and sustainability in defined 
geographic areas. Interventions will aim to build resilience to shocks, including the socioeconomic 
16 Local governance is defined by UNDP as the combined set of institutions, systems and processes at the local level through which services are provided 
to citizens and through which the latter articulate their interests and needs, and exercise their rights and obligations.
17 In line with the UNDP Gender Equality Seal Programme and the four Gender Minimum Standards of promoting internal practices, including gender 
analysis throughout the project cycle, promoting participation and addressing gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and abuse.
18 The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic was not consulted on the “Parameters and Principles of UN Assistance in Syria”impacts of COVID-19, while addressing gender equality and respecting the principle of “do no 
harm”. UNDP has made significant strides in developing methodologies and strategies for greater 
community participation in the planning and implementation of area-based early recovery processes 
in the country, which are inclusive of vulnerable groups, in particular female-headed households, 
IDPs, returnees, women, persons with disabilities and youth. By involving local authorities,
communities and relevant humanitarian partners in the identification and implementation of early 
recovery priorities, UNDP also contributes to more responsive service provision, greater
participation in local governance processes and improved coordination between recovery actors.
16. The viability of the country programme is contingent on ever-increasing, independent and 
impartial access by UNDP to communities across the country. This in turn depends on security 
conditions continuing to improve and on UNDP being accepted and trusted by its diverse national 
and subnational stakeholders. A further, severe deterioration of the socioeconomic situation would 
greatly curtail the impact of the country programme, as the scale of emergency needs would 
overwhelm the programme’s resources as well as those of the entire international response in the
country. A continued shift towards early recovery by United Nations country team (UNCT) and 
humanitarian country team partners is another condition for the country programme’s success, given 
its vision of integrated, area-based recovery that is advanced through coordinated interventions 
among relevant partners. 
17. Focusing on those left furthest behind, the country programme will target women, youth, 
persons with disabilities, female-headed households, IDPs, returnees and host communities, 
prioritizing marginalized and worst-affected areas. UNDP will support the UNCT in advancing the 
implementation of the United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy. UNDP will support 
programming by sourcing and adapting innovative solutions locally to address social, economic and 
environmental challenges including through its country Accelerator Lab.
18. The local governance and service delivery component19 will seek to prevent further erosion 
of essential service provision and of spaces for community participation in local governance, which 
are critical foundations of long-term peace and development. If UNDP promotes more inclusive, 
responsive and representative local governance and more equitable, effective and gender-sensitive 
delivery of basic services, then it will strengthen the resilience of the most vulnerable people – who 
cannot afford private alternatives to essential services – and support communities to become more 
central agents of bottom-up recovery. UNDP support will consist of three elements: (a) improve 
access to and quality of basic services through the rehabilitation of critical civilian service 
infrastructure; (b) improve subnational development planning for responsive and inclusive local 
governance that serves the needs of citizens, with a strategic focus on localizing the Sustainable 
Development Goals; and (c) support greater civic engagement, community participation and 
representation, in particular of women, in local planning processes. This provides opportunities and 
mechanisms for citizens’ voices to influence local-level decision-making and prioritization, 
including of activities implemented under the next two UNDP programmatic priorities. 
19. The local socioeconomic recovery and social cohesion component20 aims to address 
diminishing livelihood opportunities and the damage this inflicts on social cohesion. If UNDP 
supports more sustainable, equitable and gender-sensitive local economic recovery, then it will help 
generate livelihood opportunities for vulnerable Syrians and thereby alleviate frictions over rising 
inequality, competition over scarce resources and negative coping mechanisms that are weakening
the social fabric. UNDP will do so by addressing the underlying and immediate causal factors that 
impact poverty, vulnerability, and inequality, including the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19. 
The programme consists of two main elements: 
(a) Subnational economic recovery initiatives that contribute to improved livelihoods of vulnerable 
Syrians in urban and rural communities. This outcome will pay special attention to labour market 
needs in urban areas and agriculture-based livelihoods in rural areas. Moreover, it will support 
19 Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3-7, 10-11, 16; UNSF priority areas 1 and 4; UNDP signature solutions 2, 3, 6.
20 Sustainable Development Goals 1
247-1316; UNSF priority areas 2 and 3; UNDP signature solutions 136improved local economic governance and scaling-up of innovations and technological solutions for 
MSMEs to address inequalities and vulnerabilities; 
(b) Support for the enabling environment for gender-responsive social protection, social cohesion 
and sustaining peace at the local level. Sustainable and innovative approaches will be sought to 
strengthen community-based systems and structures with capacity development and innovative 
partnerships at the local level (cf. paragraph 18). This will also include the introduction of specialized 
services for the vulnerable population including digitalization and behavioural change initiatives to 
promote gender equality and community reconciliation. Integrating subnational economic recovery 
and social protection and cohesion underscores a strategic approach to incentivize social cohesion 
through qualitative changes in peoples’ lives and welfare. 
20. The climate change mitigation and adaptation and natural resource management 
component21 will contribute to enhanced community resilience to environmental degradation and 
climate change. If UNDP supports communities to advance resilient forms of green recovery, then 
it can help mitigate a further erosion of the sub-national foundations of future development due to 
climate change and environmental degradation. UNDP will improve access for the most vulnerable 
people to electricity, including renewable energy solutions, and to equitable water resources, 
including through inclusive water resource management. It will support crisis-affected communities 
in restoring degraded land, forests and ecosystems; promote climate-smart agriculture; and improve 
solid and hazardous waste management. Initiatives will support the generation of updated data and 
knowledge related to climate change, energy and natural resources; strengthen advocacy and 
coordination; and develop sub-national capacities for accelerating action on climate change, 
sustainable energy and environmental management. Community-based initiatives will closely 
associate local women’s groups focusing on strengthening environmental resilience through 
planning and implementation of innovative approaches to climate change adaptation and the 
execution of mitigation plans. 
21. Through its context-sensitive, participatory and area-based focus, UNDP will ensure integration
across the three programme streams. Interventions in prioritized areas must respond to communityowned recovery plans achieved through more participatory local governance that advance an 
inclusive vision of service delivery, socioeconomic recovery, social cohesion and climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. Intervening only through one programmatic component will lead to 
ineffective interventions unable to transform local realities and empower communities to pursue
recovery outcomes. It is only through integrated interventions across these three components –
implemented jointly by UNDP and relevant partners and stakeholders – that the foundations of future 
peace and development can be established at the sub-national level. 
22. To deliver on the priority areas, UNDP works in coordination with relevant government 
authorities at various stages and levels of action in the implementation of the country programme, 
involving when relevant private sector and national and international non-governmental 
organizations in the implementation of activities, in accordance with Syrian procedures and United 
Nations rules and regulations. UNDP will leverage the partnership forged with local administrative 
units to strengthen sustainability, local ownership and coordination of interventions. In the spirit of 
delivering as “One UN”, UNDP will be part of the UNCT, the Humanitarian Country Team, the 
Programme Management Team, the United Nations hubs in the governorates and the Operations 
Management Team, where it supports the reform agenda through the roll-out of the business 
operations strategy. UNDP will forge partnerships with United Nations agencies based on 
comparative advantage, including the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
(UNHCR) and the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat) in the design of 
gender-responsive, context-sensitive, participatory local-level area-based interventions, and will 
benefit from complementarity with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) in the design of integrated urban-rural value chains to support local livelihoods. Partnerships 
with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and 
World Health Organization (WHO) will be central to complement the delivery of quality social 
services. Collaboration with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) will be sought to 
21 Sustainable Development Goals 1
712-15; UNSF priority areas 2 and 3; UNDP signature solutions 14-6strengthen environmental safeguards. UNDP will collaborate with UNICEF, the World Food 
Programme (WFP) and International Labour Organization (ILO) to design joint interventions that 
address multidimensional poverty and strengthen social protection systems. 
23. UNDP will explore partnerships with relevant national and international non-governmental 
organizations and the private sector to promote entrepreneurship among women and youth and 
design local solutions. It will scale up the successful pilot initiatives for youth and women’s 
empowerment introduced in the previous country programme. It will also seek partnerships with 
regional and international think tanks and academic institutions to undertake rigorous studies and 
document its approaches for a wider audience. Innovative partnerships will include South-South and 
triangular cooperation, to transfer good practices on approaches (e.g., area-based and United Nations 
Disability Inclusion Strategy) and to gain practical technical expertise (e.g., exchanges with crisis 
and post-crisis countries on innovative technological solutions for the rehabilitation of physically 
disabled persons). UNDP will continue to broaden and diversify its partner and donor base by 
targeting traditional and non-traditional financing including the private sector.
III. Programme and risk management
24. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, 
regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the 
organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework.
25. The programme is predicated on the assumption that UNDP has the programming and 
operational space, including the necessary security and access to beneficiaries, to deliver the 
envisaged results in an independent and impartial way. Risks include security events that could cause 
severe programmatic disruption or jeopardize achievement of results. Continued governmental 
cooperation to facilitate access to all governorates and vulnerable populations will be critical for 
effective programme implementation. Also essential is continued donor support for early recovery 
assistance and shared risk management that gives UNDP the needed operational space to meet 
community needs. 
26. UNDP is likely to face significant operational and programming risks primarily related to the 
operating environment. Context-sensitivity and “do no harm” are of critical importance to mitigate 
risks in such a complex environment. Guided by the United Nations human-rights-based approach, 
UNDP will build on existing context-sensitivity and risk management capacities to continuously 
assess social and environmental risks, as well as risks of undermining social cohesion through its 
programme, at the operational and programmatic levels. 
27. UNDP will regularly update critical risk analysis to ensure that timely preventive mitigation 
measures are taken to avoid programme disruption and doing harm to the communities it serves. It 
will exercise due diligence and appropriate mitigation measures to ensure transparent and 
competitive procurement processes. UNDP will continuously upgrade its quality assurance measures 
for the implementation of social and environmental standards and apply gender assessment tools in 
the identification of potential risks and mitigation measures. It will ensure that its personnel and 
partners are conscious of the controls that need to be implemented, including prevention of sexual 
exploitation and abuse, to safeguard people and the environment. 
28. Country office systems, structures and capacities, particularly in planning, monitoring and
oversight, have been strategically aligned to programmatic needs and to support decision-making. 
This includes a Senior Risk Management Adviser reporting to the Resident Representative. The 
country office has strengthened analytical capacities in context-sensitivity as well as economic and 
social research to position UNDP as an innovator and knowledge broker for informed policy 
engagement. Its seven field offices, covering 14 governorates, enable UNDP to deliver substantive 
results on the ground. Their scope, configuration and staffing will be reviewed to consolidate 
response and effectiveness based on lessons learned and programme requirements.29. UNDP will engage actively with the United Nations Risk Management Working Group to 
identify collective risks to the United Nations system and suggest mitigation measures. UNDP will 
maintain close consultations with key partners to mitigate risks and take corrective measures where 
possible. A comprehensive partnership and communications strategy and action plan will be 
developed to support implementation of the country programme. Capacity enhancements in the areas 
of partnerships and communications are foreseen to extend outreach, networking and visibility. To 
mitigate risks of reduced donor support, UNDP will actively seek to diversify its donor base, 
approaching new and non-traditional donors.
30. The programme will be directly executed. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be 
used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost 
definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects. Programme and risk management arrangements of this country programme are 
in line with the UNDP enterprise risk management system to ensure foresight and risk-informed 
decisions.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
31. UNDP has established multiple monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to ensure robust 
feedback and oversight and support results reporting. These include independent monitoring and 
evaluation, community-based monitoring and evaluation, beneficiary feedback and site visits by 
programme managers, and the UNDP information management and reporting platform, considered 
a good practice by the independent country programme evaluation. These systems will be further 
strengthened and streamlined for effective gender-sensitive monitoring and oversight, quality 
assurance and to support real-time management decision-making by including gender-, age- and 
disability-sensitive indicators and ensuring that processes reflect the views of a representative cross 
section of the population. Evidence generated by independent evaluations, context analysis, 
monitoring visits and beneficiary feedback will be used to validate and update the programme theory 
of change and refine implementation strategies, as appropriate.
32. UNDP will align, and where relevant use, the country programme indicators with the UNSF, 
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025 and the country’s priorities to ensure that data generated through 
United Nations and national sources are consistent and available to meet UNDP monitoring and 
reporting requirements. UNDP and the Government’s’ Planning and International Cooperation 
Commission will monitor the country programme’s achievements and implementation issues on an 
ongoing basis, using a simplified set of indicators.
33. UNDP will further strengthen its monitoring and evaluation, programme quality assurance and 
oversight capacity to enhance accountability, inform decision-making and promote learning through 
evidence-based analyses to improve results-based and adaptive management.
34. A key challenge is the availability of reliable, timely, consistent and disaggregated data for 
evidence-based policy formulation, results-based monitoring, and impact analysis of development 
interventions. Context analysis has emphasized the need for strengthening disaggregated and 
anonymized data generation, analysis and use. UNDP will explore partnerships with the United 
Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, the Economic and Social Commission for 
Western Asia, UNICEF and other United Nations agencies to identify needs and enhance the quality, 
reliability and availability of data secured and disaggregated by sex, age and geographic location as 
a basis for informed policy- and decision-making, monitoring and evaluation, with a focus on people
groups, gender studies, analysis related to the Sustainable Development Goals and socioeconomic 
assessments. Annex. Results and resources framework for the Syrian Arab Republic (2022-2024)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
National Strategic Plan “Syria 2030” Pillar 2: Growth and Development, Pillar 4: Human Development
UNITED NATIONS STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: 
OUTCOME II: Better access for people, especially the most vulnerable, to social protection services, sustainable livelihoods, and inclusive and equitable socioeconomic recovery.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome III: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
STRATEGIC 
FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, 
TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME 
($)
Indicator: 
TBC
Baseline (2021):
Target (2024):
• Source: 
UNDP Information 
Management Reporting 
Platform (IMRP) and 
project reports
• Frequency: annually 
Output 1.1: Local economic recovery and 
livelihoods for vulnerable populations enabled 
through inclusive private sector recovery and 
development, human capital development and 
pro-poor market interventions
Indicator 1.1: Number of people benefiting from 
jobs and improved livelihoods (disaggregated by 
sex, age, disability, rural/urban, IDPs) 
Baseline: TBC (2021) 
Target: 350,000 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output 1.2: Inequality and vulnerability 
addressed through support for inclusive local 
economic governance and ecosystem
Indicator 1.2: Number of systems enhanced to 
enable inclusive and equitable recovery and 
livelihoods for vulnerable populations 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 5 (2024)
Planning and International Cooperation 
Committee 
Ministry of Social Affairs and Labour
Ministry of Agriculture
Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Local Administration and 
Environment 
WFP; FAO; UNICEF; UNFPA; ILO; 
UNRWA; 
International non-governmental 
organizations (INGOs), nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
Local administrative units 
Private sector
International/ national institutions
Regular
$1,500,000
Other:
$56,500,000Source: IMRP and project reports
Output 1.3: Local-level support for social 
protection/cohesion, gender equity, social 
inclusion and sustaining peace enabled
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of community-level 
gender-responsive, youth-led initiatives in place to 
strengthen social cohesion 
Baseline: TBC (2021) 
Target: additional 90 (2024) of which 54 women-
focused
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 1.3.2. Number of context and local 
development analyses conducted with 
stakeholders to inform decision-making and risk 
management strategies, disaggregated by national 
and subnational levels. 
Baseline: TBC (2021) 
Target: 10 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 1.3.3: Number of vulnerable 
populations supported with comprehensive social 
protection services with focus on persons with 
disabilities and women
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 5,400 (3,300 women) (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output 1.4: Multi-goal and multidisciplinary 
planning approach to support gender 
integration is adopted. 
Indicator 1.4.1:Number of procedures and 
standards developed to promote gender equality
within national partners and civil society 
organizations (CSOs)Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 4 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 
National Strategic Plan “Syria 2030” Pillar 1: Administrative Reform and Promoting Integrity, Pillar 3: Infrastructure and Energy, Pillar 4: Human 
Development
UNITED NATIONS STRATEGIC FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: 
OUTCOME I: Improved, equitable, inclusive, and safe access to quality basic services.
OUTCOME III: Improved living conditions of displaced people, returnees and affected communities.
OUTCOME IV: Vulnerable people’s resilience is enhanced through increased institutional responsiveness in planning and providing services
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome III: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
Indicator: 
TBC
Baseline 
(2021)
Target (2024): 
• Source:
 IMRP, project reports
• Frequency: annually
Output 2.1: Responsive, accountable, and 
transparent local governance in place
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of municipalities/local 
administration units with inclusive and 
participatory recovery and/or local development 
plans in line with the Sustainable Development 
Goals
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 30 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of representatives/ staffs
from local administrative units benefiting from 
capacity development to expand equitable local 
service delivery (disaggregated by gender and 
location)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 1,350 (2024) 
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.1.3 Number of women benefiting
from leadership preparedness programmes for 
active participation in local planning 
(disaggregated by location)
Planning and International Cooperation 
Committee 
Ministry of Local Administration and 
Environment 
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Education 
Ministry of Water Resources
Ministry of Electricity 
WHO, UNFPA, UNICEF, UN-Habitat,
UNHCR
INGOs, NGOs
Local administrative units 
Syndicate of Engineers, 
Chamber of Commerce/Industry. 
Community-based organizations 
Private sector
Regular:
$5,885,000
Other: 
$55,500,000 Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 300 women (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output 2.2: Solid waste and debris 
management system in identified communities 
restored and functioning
Indicator 2.2.1.: Number of people benefiting 
from job opportunities in solid waste and debris 
management projects (disaggregated by sex, 
location, disability, IDPs)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 7,000 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of people benefiting 
from access to their areas (disaggregated by sex, 
location, disability, IDPs)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 750,000 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.2.3: Quantities of solid waste and 
debris collected and removed (disaggregated by 
location)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 200,000 cubic meters(2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.2.4: Number of restored/built solid 
waste and debris management systems 
(disaggregated by location)
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 2 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output: 2.3.: Local social services and basic 
community infrastructures repaired
International/ national institutions Indicator 2.3.1: Number of infrastructure
rehabilitated (disaggregated by location)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 48 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicators 2.3.2 Number of people benefitting 
from improved infrastructure (disaggregated by 
sex, location, disability, IDPs) 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 1,299,000 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.3.3: Kilometre of basic networks 
rehabilitated (electricity, water, sewage)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 50 km (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output: 2.4: Access to essential electrical 
power restored 
Indicator 2.4.1: Number of people benefiting 
from electricity delivered (disaggregated by sex, 
location, disability, IDPs)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 200,000 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.4.2: Number of hydroelectric plants 
rehabilitated 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 2 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output 2.5: Community security enhanced 
through renewable energy in shared spaces Indicator 2.5.1: Units of solar systems installed 
(disaggregated by location) 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 1,200 units (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.5.2: MWof electricity/renewable 
energy generated (disaggregated by location) 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 200 MW (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator2.5.3: Number of people benefiting 
from renewable energy delivered (disaggregated 
by sex, location, disability, IDPs)
Baseline: TBC (2021) 
Target: 250,000 (2024)
Output 2.6: People’s access to justice services 
increased through improved local capacities, rule of law and local community safety
Indicator 2.6.1: Number of people including 
IDPs and returnees benefiting from access to legal 
counselling sessions (disaggregated by sex and 
location)
Baseline: TBC (2021) 
Target: 22,500 (2024) 
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator2.6.2: Number of people trained on 
legal issues, civil responsibility and coping 
strategies (disaggregated by sex, age, location, 
disability, IDPs) 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 2,700 students/lawyers (2024) 
Source: IMRP and project reportsOutput 2.7: Capacities of civic organizations 
and other active local partners enhanced to be 
inclusive, accountable and support their 
communities’ resilience 
Indicator 2.7.1:Number of CSOs/NGOs/local 
partners engaged in capacity development 
activities (disaggregated by location)
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 1,000 (2024)
Source: CSO Platform Database and IMRP 
Indicator 2.7.2:Number of civic initiatives 
supported 
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 30 (2024)
Source: CSO Platform Database and IMRP 
Indicator 2.7.3: Number of CSOs/NGOs meeting 
civic accreditation standards (disaggregated by 
location)
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 50 (2024)
Source: CSO Platform Database and IMRP
Output 2.8: Community resilience to 
environment degradation and climate change 
enhanced 
Indicator 2.8.1: Number of people directly 
benefiting from initiatives to protect nature and 
promote sustainable use of resources 
(disaggregated by sex, age, and location) 
Baseline: TBC (2021)
Target: 240,300 (2024) 
Source: IMRP and project reports 
Indicator 2.8.2: Number of local communities 
supported with strengthened capacity in environment management, climate change 
adaptation/disaster risk reduction (disaggregated 
by sex, age, and location).
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 4 (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Indicator 2.8.3: Number of public-private 
partnership strategies in place for increased 
investments in sustainable management and use 
of resources
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 1 strategy developed (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports
Output 2.9: Community engagement in 
gender-sensitive and inclusive climate change 
adaptation, environmental management and 
durable solutions to displacement strengthened 
Indicator 2.9.1: Number of communities 
benefitting from initiatives to protect nature and 
promote sustainable use of resources 
(disaggregated by location)
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 4 local communities (2024)
Source: IMRP and project reports 
Indicator 2.9.2: Number of local climate change 
adaptation/disaster risk reduction and ecosystem 
management plans developed in selected areas 
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 2 (2024) 
Source: IMRP and project report
Planning and International Cooperation 
Committee 
Ministry of Local Administration and 
Environment 
Ministry of Agriculture and Agricultural 
Reform 
Ministry of Water Resources 
Ministry of Electricity 
UN-Habitat, FAO, UNEP
INGOs, NGOs, Syndicate of Engineers; 
Community-based organizations
Local Administrative units 
Private sector
International Centre for Agricultural 
Research in Dry Areas; 
Arab Centre for the Studies of Arid 
Zones and Dry Lands