File Name: TGO-CPD-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Togo
Country Code: TGO
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 21-25 January 2019
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2023
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
21 November 2018
Original: English
1820010X (E) 261118
First regular session 2019
21-25 January 2019, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Togo (2019-2023)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management .................................................................................... 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Togo (2019-2023) 8I. Programme rationale
1. Togo’s Vision 2030 is to become a stable, democratic and middle-income country. With an 
estimated population of 7.6 million (2016), 60 per cent under 25 and 51.4 per cent female,
1 Togo 
ranks second among the top 10 reforming countries in Africa over the past decade.
2 During the same 
period, Togo experienced a steady annual growth rate of 5 per cent and reduced poverty by 8 
percentage points.
3 However, Togo faces serious challenges in achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals. Massive public investments led to high debt levels (81.3 per cent in 2016).
4
Access to basic services remains limited with 29 per cent of Togolese living more than five
kilometres from health facilities,
5 38.2 per cent lacking access to drinking water6
and only 54 per 
cent of people living with HIV having access to antiretroviral therapy,
7 despite high national HIV 
rates (2.5 per cent). Togo ranked 166 of 188 on the 2016 Human Development Index.
2. Togo’s multidimensional poverty is the consequence of weak economic diversification, 
ineffective development management and insufficient inclusive governance, which exacerbate
vulnerability to climate change. Poverty affects 68.7 per cent of rural areas and 37.9 per cent of 
urban areas.
8 Women-headed households are the poorest (57.5 per cent) due to sociocultural barriers 
and patriarchal structures, resulting in women’s low education, less access to capital and land 
ownership and low participation in decision-making (18 per cent of parliamentary seats and 24 per 
cent of central government positions). Women achieve only 84 per cent9 of the level of human 
development achieved by men. Togo’s economy is dominated by the informal sector and agriculture,
which represents 41 per cent of gross domestic product10 and is characterized by low productivity,
weak competitiveness and endemic poverty among farmers (72.6 per cent in 2015).
11 Although the 
poverty rate has declined, inequality persists with the Gini Index rising from 0.393 in 2011 to 0.427 
in 2017. Although the unemployment rate decreased from 6.5 per cent to 3.4 per cent between 2011 
and 2015, underemployment increased from 22.8 per cent to 25.8 per cent12 (24.1 per cent for 
women). Major constraints to employment relate to the mismatch of youth skills and labour market
needs.
3. Togo's poverty profile is linked to negative climate change impacts, weak waste management
and land degradation translated into high rates of deforestation (10,000 to 15,000 hectares per 
year).
13 Natural resource depletion and increasing vulnerability to natural disasters and climate 
change pose a threat to sustainable human development, undermine poverty eradication efforts and 
increase pressure on limited natural resources. Some 90.6 per cent of households use firewood as 
the primary energy source for cooking14 and women produce 70 to 80 per cent of charcoal using 
rudimentary techniques.
15 Agriculture, which employs more than 65 per cent of the workforce (53.3
per cent women),16 is mainly rain-dependent and applies slash-and-burn farming, thereby 
threatening the sustainability of forest resources17 and amplifying the population’s vulnerability to 
natural hazards,
18 affecting economic development.19
 
1 National Development Plan (NDP), 2018-2022.
2
Ibrahim Index of African Governance 2017.
3 National Institute of Statistics and Economic and Demographic Studies (Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes 
Economiques et Démographiques ((INSEED)), Poverty Mapping, 2018
4
International Monetary Fund Country Report N°27/127.
5 Togo Health Statistics Directory, 2016
6 NDP.
7 National AIDS Programme Annual Report 2017.
8
INSEED, Poverty Profile, 2015.
9 UNDP Human Development Report, 2016.
10 National Programme for Agricultural Investment, Food Security and Nutrition, 2017-2026.
11 INSEED, Poverty Profile, 2015.
12 Basic Living Standards Questionnaire (Questionnaire des Indicateurs de Base du Bien-être (QUIBB) 2011 and 2015,
13 Strategic Response Framework for Environmental and Natural Resource Management 2018.
14 QUIBB 2015.
15 National Reforestation Programme 2017.
16 National Agricultural Census 2013.
17 Togo Third National Communication on Climate Change, 2015.DP/DCP/TGO/3
4. Togo progressed from a rating of 45.0 in 2010 to 51.7 in 2016 on the Ibrahim Index of African 
Governance, however challenges persist in the rule of law and national security. Frequent political 
tensions due to the lack of consensus on constitutional and institutional reforms affect stability, 
reverse development gains and slow efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. The 
political unrest that emerged in August 2017 reduced prospects for growth in 2018 by 0.6 percentage 
points. Weak media professionalism, combined with historical societal and ethnic fractures,
continues to heighten tensions. A roadmap supported by the Economic Community of West African 
States for constitutional and electoral reforms guides consultation among relevant parties for the 
political crisisresolution. The 37 Local Peace Committees(LPCs) lack adequate technical capacities 
for prevention and peaceful management of local conflicts. The Government is committed to 
pursuing regional and interregional efforts for peace, security and stability in view of the terrorist 
threats in neighbouring countries.
5. The Government’s efforts to improve the rule of law, access to justice and human rights, such as 
the adoption of a new Penal Code and Legal Aid Act, the establishment of "Justice Houses" and 
capacity-building of judges, are undermined by the lack of accountability, weak sectoral information 
systems, limited access to justice at local level and inability to fight impunity. The human rightsbased approach is not sufficiently integrated in policy and planning processes, which is further 
compounded by a lack of professionalism of human rights defenders, weak monitoring and 
advocacy capacities of the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and civil society 
organizations (CSOs), and stigma and discrimination against persons living with HIV and AIDS. 
Gender-based violence (GBV) remains a critical issue, with limited access to justice for victims and 
the lack of a multisectoral coordination mechanism for prevention and response (29 per cent of 
women report having been physically abused since the age of 15).
20 Key institutions such as 
Parliament, the High Authority against Corruption (Haute autorité de prévention et de lutte contre 
la corruption et les infractions assimilées (HAPLUCIA)), the High Authority for Audio-Visual 
Communication (Haute autorité de l'audiovisuel et de la communication (HAAC)), the judiciary and 
NHRC need strengthened technical capacities to adequately fulfil their missions. 
6. The public administration is affected by weaknesses in national civil service management, 
corruption,
21 lack of accountability, persistent capacity gaps to fulfil mandates and limited 
participation of women and youth in decision-making. The national statistical system lacks adequate 
capacity to produce accurate, frequent and disaggregated data.
22 The establishment of the National 
Council and the Legal Framework for Decentralization are insufficient to ensure participatory 
governance and delivery of improved public services. 
7. Togo’s National Development Plan (NDP) 2018-2022, which integrates 48 prioritized 
Sustainable Development Goal targets, aims to accelerate economic growth and reduce 
underemployment through massive private sector investments in infrastructure and economic 
structural transformation. UNDP supported Togo to present its voluntary reports during the first 
three high-level political forums on sustainable development and remains a key partner of the 
Government in mainstreaming and localizing the Goals.
8. The 2017 independent evaluation of the previous country programme found that UNDP has 
strong comparative advantages in electoral assistance, peace consolidation, public administration 
capacity-building and environmental management, including the implementation of innovative 
multi-dimensional programmes, such as the flagship government-funded Emergency Community
Development Programme (Programme d'urgence de développement communautaire (PUDC))
which helped to improve living conditions of about 25 per cent of the population through the health, 
education and transport facilitation sectors.
23 UNDP support was recognized in the areas of: (a) 
enhancing a peaceful environment through effective early warning mechanisms, i.e., establishment 
of LPCs and organization of credible elections; (b) improving the coordination of the public 
administration’s legal and institutional framework with tools and systems; and (c) improving clean 
 
20 Demographic and Health Survey, 2013-2014.
21 Togo has a rating of 32 of 100 on the 2017 Transparency International Corruption Perception Index 2017.energy access through the pilot ecovillages initiative. These results were achieved in collaboration 
with national institutions and partners such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Global 
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, United Nations agencies, the European Union and
the Governments of Germany and the United States.
9. Lessons learned include the need to scale up interventions and strengthen national capacities at 
all levels to accelerate access and delivery of services to the population. The proposed programme
will focus more on the comparative advantages of UNDP in attracting government financing for 
development and expanding service delivery to the local level, using a cross-cutting strategy.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
10. The programme, designed with the participation of key national stakeholders, is aligned with 
the NDP 2018-2022, United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) 2019-2023
and UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021 and focuses on three interlinked transformational paths: (a) 
enhancing governance to improve citizen participation; (b) promoting inclusive growth and access 
to basic services; and (c) strengthening sustainable natural resource management and resilience to 
climate change.
11. The programme assumes that: (a) strengthening inclusive governance and reinforcing the 
capacity of national institutions to deliver improved access to basic services, if combined with 
effective and accountable institutions and mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of conflicts and 
for social cohesion, will create the enabling environment to ensure effective governance and peace;
(b) an unobstructed vision for sustainable management of natural resources and increased resilience 
of populations and ecosystems to climate change and disaster, particularly in rural areas, will create 
better conditions for lifting people out of poverty; and (c) creating jobs and innovative value chains, 
promoting youth and women’s empowerment and participation in governance at all levels, and a 
peaceful resilient society will lead to strong, inclusive and sustainable growth for multidimensional 
poverty eradication. UNDP will adopt a human rights-based and gender-equity approach and will 
involve all targeted groups in the planning, implementation and monitoring of its programme.
12. The programme targets the five regions with focus on rural and undeserved areas, youth, 
persons with a disability, women and local/community institutions. It will contribute to the 
achievement of Togo’s prioritized targets for Sustainable Development Goals 1 to10, 13, 15, 16 and
17 and is inspired by the Strategic Plan six signature solutions.
13. Key partnerships will be enhanced and government financing will continue to be leveraged to 
accelerate achievement of the Goals. UNDP playing its integrator role will strengthen partnerships
with United Nations agencies, global financial institutions, the private sector and other key technical 
partners. South-South and triangular cooperation will be promoted in the fields of decentralization, 
peace consolidation and gender equality. UNDP will explore innovative solutions and establish 
country support platforms for gender and youth promotion using new technology and social media.
Pillar 1. Enhancing governance, rule of law and peace consolidation
14. UNDP will build on the existing programme to enhance governance by: (a) using digital 
technologies to improve the civil service management system; (b) introducing an integrated 
planning and monitoring system for the Sustainable Development Goals; (c) strengthening 
capacities of governance institutions and electoral management bodies to promote rule of law, 
human rights, justice, transparency, accountability and credible and inclusive elections; and (d)
consolidating the peace infrastructure. Varied strategies such as advocacy, advisory services, 
capacity-building, enhancement of civil society engagement mechanisms, utilization of innovative 
solutions and South-South cooperation will be employed using signature solutions 2 and 6 of the 
Strategic Plan to achieve Goals 5, 8, 10, 16 and 17. UNDP will target local and national institutions 
as well as women, youth, persons with disabilities and persons living with HIV and AIDS. 
15. Building on the successful support provided to the modernization of public administration since 
2008 and in partnership with the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, DP/DCP/TGO/3
decentralization policy and ensure access to quality public services. The implementation of a
centralized management system for civil servants and establishment of an integrated and 
participatory planning, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for the NDP will help improve the 
efficiency of public administration. UNDP will assist the Ministry of Planning and Kara University 
to build the capacity and cadre of planning specialists. In collaboration with the United Nations 
Children’s Fund United Nations Population Fund, World Bank and European Union, UNDP will 
strengthen its partnership with the National Institute of Statistics and Economic and Demographic 
Studies (Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques et Démographiques 
(INSEED)) to improve the production of disaggregated data. The capacity to collect data and 
conduct analysis on gender issues will be strengthened. In collaboration with the European Union, 
German Agency for International Cooperation and the World Bank, UNDP will continue to support 
the decentralization process through advocacy and advisory services, local government capacitybuilding and leveraging innovative technologies and South-South opportunities with countries such 
as Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Nigeria and Senegal. UNDP will facilitate the creation of 
collaborative platforms to ensure civic engagement and participation, particularly of women, youth 
and persons with disabilities.
16. In line with the recommendations of the universal periodic review, UNDP with other partners
will strengthen institutional capacities related to the justice sector, human rights and civil society,
to consolidate the rule of law and promote human rights and equal access to justice. Capacitybuilding will seek to fulfil national and international obligations for ratified human rights
instruments. Emphasis will be given to the improvement of access to justice for youth, women, GBV 
victims, persons with disabilities and persons living with HIV and AIDS. Technical support to the 
Ministry of Justice will help implement the National Justice Policy, the new Legal Aid Act and the 
management of newly established “Justice Houses”. Justice will be brought closer to citizens using
traditional approaches to mediation. UNDP will support strengthening of the justice information 
system and define indicators to improve the efficiency, accountability and citizen access to the 
justice system.
17. To consolidate its niche in supporting democratic processes, technical assistance will help
Parliament to adopt laws in line with the Goals, the HAPLUCIA to fight corruption, HAAC to 
professionalize the media landscape, High Commission for Reconciliation and National Unity 
(Haut-Commissariat à la Réconciliation et au Renforcement de l’Unité Nationale (HCCRUN)) to 
promote national cohesion, and the National Independent Electoral Commission to ensure 
democratic and transparent elections. Based on successful initiatives in conflict 
prevention/resolution such as LPCs and support to the HCCRUN, UNDP will increase support to 
address recurrent conflict related to political and constitutional issues through capacity-building, 
dialogue and mediation at the national and community levels.
Pillar 2. Promoting inclusive growth and access to basic services
18. To contribute to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10 and 17,
based on signature solutions 1, 5 and 6, this pillar aims to create conditions for strong sustainable 
growth with job creation and improving access to basic services for the most disadvantaged. UNDP 
will strengthen: (a) the capacity of public institutions in charge of employment promotion; (b) the 
entrepreneurial capacities of professional organizations, cooperatives and associations and 
innovation in the private sector; and (c) access to basic services through the PUDC.
19. In collaboration with the International Labour Organization, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, World Bank and African Development Bank, UNDP will 
facilitate strategic partnerships in vocational and technical training among the public and private 
sectors to ensure skills alignment to the needs of the labour market, improve the legal and regulatory 
framework for employment, enhance the production of essential information and analyses for 
smooth functioning of the labour market and improve the business environment. South-South 
cooperation will encourage technology transfer and innovation in the public and private sectors,
particularly among youth through mentoring and the creation of innovation platforms.
20In partnership with World Food ProgrammeUnited Nations Capital Development Fund and of professional private sector organizations using new technology, enhanced processes and value 
chain analysis and development to improve agrobusiness, promote sustainable job creation, increase 
productivity and competitiveness to enable transformation in the agricultural sector.
21. UNDP, anchored by PUDC, will complement the Government's efforts for improved access to 
and quality of health-care and educational services, clean water and energy through efficient service 
delivery and construction, provision and installation of infrastructure/equipment. New jobs created 
based on installation and maintenance of infrastructure or new equipment will generate economic 
dynamism and increase income for youth, women, farmers and artisans. As an integrator of 
solutions, UNDP will consolidate partnerships with United Nations agencies for the delivery of their 
services in the same or complementary localities. UNDP in collaboration with the Government will
also explore public-private partnership in infrastructure. UNDP will work to build the capacity of 
grass-roots communities and civil society groups within the context of decentralization to achieve 
more effective management of these investments for their sustainability.
Pillar 3. Promoting sustainable management of natural resources, resilience to 
climate change and disasters
22. Priority will be given to support the implementation of relevant international agreements
notably, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the Convention to Combat Desertification and 
Convention on Biological Diversity. To achieve Goals 7, 13 and 15 and using signature solutions 3, 
4, 5 and 6, UNDP interventions will focus on: (a) improving access to sustainable domestic energy 
and a decent living environment, especially in the poorest rural areas; (b) increasing community
resilience to climate change and disasters; and (c) strengthening low-carbon initiatives in villages 
by scaling up the ecovillage initiative while promoting sustainable management of ecosystem goods
and services. To achieve this, increased access to renewable and alternative energies will be 
improved for households, particularly women-headed households. Women charcoal producers will 
be supported in identifying and implementing high-income substitution initiatives. National and 
regional institutions capacity strengthening, including the National Civil Protection Agency
(NCPA), will enable formulation of climate, risk and gender-responsive plans and policies. Regional 
contingency plans will enable adequate responses to disaster for vulnerable populations, particularly 
women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities. The operational capacities of vulnerable 
communities in areas with high exposure to natural hazards will be strengthened.
23. UNDP will strengthen its partnership with the GEF, Green Climate Fund and the Adaptation 
Fund to mobilize resources to implement innovative projects. UNDP will seek synergies with 
partners working on environment, climate change and disaster risk reduction including the private 
sector and CSOs. Technical cooperation will be promoted with research institutions and universities 
on cutting-edge technologies. South-South cooperation will be explored on best practices and 
lessons learned about access to clean energy.
III. Programme and risk management
24. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of management at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the 
organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control 
framework. In accordance with Executive Board decision 2013/9, all direct costs associated with 
project implementation will be charged to the concerned projects.
25. Appropriate implementation modalities will be used based on the assessment of national 
capacities to ensure national ownership and accountability. UNDP will create a benchmark for 
delivery to ensure sustainability, indicating internal capacity needs. The financial sustainability plan 
will be reviewed regularly for optimal use of resources and management ratios to adjust the structure 
of the office, meet operational requirements and mitigate operational risks.DP/DCP/TGO/3
26. Programme implementation will be aligned with the Delivering as One initiative. UNDP, in 
collaboration with the United Nations Country Team, will continue assessing implementing 
partners’ capacities under the harmonized approach to cash transfers. Other harmonized and 
collective programming instruments associated with the single programming framework will also 
be promoted, including joint inter-agency programmes and the business operations strategy.
27. A partnerships and communication strategy and action plan will be developed to underpin the 
programme. UNDP will consider social and environmental sustainability issues in the design and 
management of all portfolios and will focus on gender issues, disaster risk reduction and human 
rights.
28. The anticipated risks to the programme are related to: (a) resource mobilization constraints; (b) 
socio-political instability; and (c) weak national ownership. Resource mobilization constraints are 
inherent to the limited number of partners having direct cooperation with Togo. In addition, despite 
the high level of resources mobilized through government financing, their disbursement remains a 
major challenge. The political divide can adversely impact implementation.
29. To mitigate these risks, UNDP will: (a) take a proactive approach to government financing, 
explore public-private partnership opportunities and assist the Government in fiscal space analysis 
for domestic revenue mobilization; (b) develop donor intelligence towards partners supporting 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, including the private sector, foundations, 
international financial institutions, and non-traditional donors; (c) support political and social 
dialogue and advocate for successful reforms; (d) hold regular consultations and build capacities of 
the Government, local communities and CSOs to rationalize resources usage; (e) establish an exit 
strategy based on the type of project; and (f) enhance the coordination framework. The UNDP 
quality assurance, social and environmental standards will be applied to all projects along with 
gender mainstreaming. The country office will aim to achieve the Gender Seal gold certification.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
30. Improved monitoring and evaluation of programme outcomes will be a priority with the 
programme indicators aligned with the Goals, NDP, UNDAF and Strategic Plan indicators. UNDP 
will set up a monitoring and evaluation framework aligned with the NDP and Strategic Plan 
monitoring frameworks. At least 5 per cent of the budget will be allocated to monitoring, evaluation 
and data collection activities and indicators will be tracked during project implementation via 
regular field visits, jointly organized with all partners. Quarterly and annual reports will be 
produced. The monitoring and evaluation system will be based on the 2019-2023 joint programming 
framework, considering the recommendations of the evaluation of the previous country programme.
31. In collaboration with United Nations agencies and INSEED, UNDP will support domestication
and localization of the Goals with better targeting of beneficiaries and disaggregation of data. 
Emphasis will be placed on building the capacity of partners for results-based management and the 
data collected will feed the UNDP monitoring and knowledge-sharing system and communication 
for visibility.
32. UNDP will use a participatory approach, including programme steering committees and 
established mechanisms for monitoring the UNDAF, NDP and Goals and the participation of 
beneficiaries to monitor and evaluate programme results. UNDP will continually oversee and track 
its contributions towards achievement of UNDAF outcomes. UNDP will conduct evaluations, in 
accordance with the evaluation plan, to determine progress, identify lessons and challenges and 
proffer solutions. To further mitigate risks, projects will undergo systematic reviews to ensure 
environmental and social safeguards.
33. Systematic monitoring of the UNDP gender marker will ensure that gender issues are 
mainstreamed into programmes and will be a tool for allocating resources to support targeted 
initiatives designed to address these issues. Annex: Results and resources framework for Togo (2019–2023) 
 
24 1: system is not in place; 2: strategic and centralized system is in place but not utilized; 3: system is operational but not fully utilized; 4: all functions are utilized
25 1: no simplification; 2: some simplification; 3: significant simplification; 4: all procedures are simplified
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP Pillar 3: Consolidate social development and strengthen mechanisms for inclusion
UNDAF OUTCOME 4: By 2023, public institutions at central and local levels increasingly apply principles of inclusive governance with a focus on accountability, citizen 
participation, equitable access to quality public services and social cohesion.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Accelerate the structural reforms conducive to sustainable development
UNDAF outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source/ frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including 
indicators, baselines targets)
Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Indicative resources 
by outcome ($)
Indicator 1.1. Proportion of 
population satisfied with 
their last experience of 
public services
Baseline (2018): To be 
determined
Men: TBD 
Women: TBD
Target:
Men: 10% Increase 
Women: 10% Increase
Indicator 1.2
Ibrahim Index
Baseline (2016): 51.7%
Target level (2023): 60%
Data source: 
Public service users’ satisfaction 
surveys 
Frequency: Every 3 years
Responsible entity: Ministry of 
Administrative Reform
Data source: TI Report
Output 1.1: Ministry of public administration and other 
targeted institutions at national and local levels have 
strengthened capacities to ensure effectiveness of public 
services delivery
Indicator 1.1.1: Extent of utilization of UNDP-supported 
civil servant centralized management system in public 
administration
Baseline (2017)24: 1
Target: 3
Data source: National Programme for Strengthening 
Capacities and Modernization of the State for Sustainable 
Development (Programme National de Renforcement des 
Capacités et de Modernisation de l'Etat pour le 
Développement Durable (PNRCME-DD) Annual report 
Indicator 1.1.2 Extent to which UNDP-supported 
simplified procedures are used to deliver services related 
to legal identity civil registration and nationality 
certificates
Baseline: (2017)25: 2
Target: 3
Data source: Annual report Ministry of territorial 
administration
Ministries in charge of:
- development and planning,
- administrative reform,
- economy and finance, 
- social affairs and gender, 
- digital economy
- territorial administration, 
- justice
- security and civil protection
State Secretariat for Human Rights
Parliament
NHRC
Constitutional Court 
HCCRUN
National Independent Electoral 
Commission
Regular: $10,000,000
Other: $16,338,000DP/DCP/TGO/3
 
26 1: No measures exist; 2: very weak measures are adopted; 3: some significant measures; 4: appropriate measures
Indicator 1.1.3: Existence of effective measures adopted
with UNDP support to mitigate and remedy corruption 
risks at a) National, b) subnational and c) sector level of 
public administration
Baseline (2017) 26: (a) No; (b)No; (c) No
Target: (a) Yes; (b) Yes; (c) Yes
Data source: HAPLUCIA Annual report
Indicator 1.1.4: Existence of UNDP-supported platforms, 
including women, youth, against corruption in public 
administration
Baseline (2017): No
Target: Yes
Data source: HAPLUCIA Annual reports
Output 1.2: Government capacities developed to 
integrate 2030 Agenda, Agenda 2063 and the Paris 
Agreement on development plans, budgets, and to analyze 
progress towards the SDGs, using innovative and datadriven solutions
Indicator 1.2.1: Existence of UNDP-supported 
development plans and budgets that integrate international 
agreements across the whole-of-government:
(a) 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(b) Paris Agreement
Baseline (2017): (a) No; (b) No
Target: (a) Yes; (b) Yes
Data source: NDP annual report
Indicator 1.2.2 Existence of UNDP-supported data 
collection/analysis mechanisms providing disaggregated 
data by gender, age and other characteristic to monitor 
progress towards the SDGs:
(a) Conventional data collection methods (e.g. 
surveys)
(b) Administrative reporting systems
Baseline (2017): (a) No; (b) No 
Target: (a) Yes; (b) Yes
HAPLUCIA
HAAC
Local governments
European Union, World Bank, 
GIZ, KFW
Embassies of Germany and of the 
United States
UNDESA, ILO, UNFPA, UNICEF, 
AfDB, IMF
CSO Network,
Women's associations 
27 1 less than 25% of capacities/resources are transferred; 2: Between 25%-50% of capacities/resources are transferred; 3: Between 50%-75% of capacities/resources are transferred; 4: More than 75% of 
capacities/resources are transferred
28 1. No participation; 2: low participation; 3: some significant participation; 4: full participation
Data source: Annual report of 
NDP implementation
Data source: INSEED annual and sectoral reports
Output 1.3: Enhanced capacities of national and local 
institutions to design, implement and evaluate gender
responsive and inclusive decentralization policies and 
local development plan
Indicator 1.3.1: Extent to which legal competencies and 
financial resources are transferred from central public 
administration to local governments
Baseline (2018) 27: 1
Target: 2
Data source: Ministries of Decentralization and of 
Finance annual reports
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of UNDP-supported local
governments which have functioning gender responsive 
planning, budgeting and monitoring system
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 10 
Data source: Ministry of Decentralization annual report
Indicator 1.3.3. Extent to which priorities voiced by 
women, persons with disabilities and youth are integrated 
into the design, implementation and monitoring of local 
development plans with UNDP support
Baseline (year 2017) 28: 2
Target: 3
Data source: Municipalities/CSOs Annual Reports 
Output 1.4: Justice and human rights institutions enabled 
to improve human rights rule of law, and access to justice 
of women, youth, persons living with HIV and AIDS and 
persons with disabilities
Indicator 1.4.1 Existence of UNDP-supported
strengthened institutions and systems supporting DP/DCP/TGO/3
fulfilment of nationally and internationally ratified human 
rights obligations:
a. Rule of law and justice
b. Human rights
Baseline (2017): (a) No; (b) No 
Target: (2023) (a) Yes; (b) Yes
Data source: NCHR Annual report 
Indicator 1.4.2 Existence of an information system on 
justice efficiency
Baseline (year 2017): No
Target: Yes
Data source: Ministry of Justice Annual report 
Indicator 1.4.3 Number of UNDP-supported Justice 
Houses and Legal Aid offices strengthened
Baseline (year 2017): 0
Target: 8
Data source: Ministry of Justice Annual report 
Indicator 1.4.4: Percentage of new reported GBV cases, 
resulting in conviction of perpetrators/reparation for 
survivors
Baseline (year 2017): 0
Target: 50%
Data source: NHRC Annual report 
Indicator 1.4.5: percentage of new cases of 
stigmatization of persons living with HIV and AIDS 
reported and resolved
Baseline (year 2017): 0
Target:50%
Data source: NHRC Annual report 
Output 1.5.: Constitution-making, electoral management, 
oversight and regulation of the media landscape, and 
parliamentary processes are strengthened to promote 
inclusion, transparency, accountability and social 
cohesion.Indicator 1.5.1: Number of UNDP-supported electoral 
management bodies with strengthened capacity to conduct 
inclusive, effective and accountable elections
Baseline (year 2017): 1
Target:5
Data source: Ministry of Territorial Administration 
Report
Indicator 1.5.2: Percentage of UNDP-supported HAAC 
strategic plan measures implemented
Baseline (year 2018): 0
Target: 50%
Data source: HAAC annual reports
Indicator 1.5.3: Proportion of women in managerial 
positions in the public administration Baseline 2015: 15.74% 
Target 2023: 20% 
Data source: PNRCME-DD Annual report 
Indicator 1.5.4 Improved capacities of parliament to 
undertake inclusive, effective and accountable law-
making, oversight and representation
Baseline (2017) No
Target (2023): Yes
Data source: Annual parliament reports 
Output 1.6. The technical capacities of national and local 
structures, CSOs, youth and women are strengthened for 
the prevention and management of conflicts and 
promotion of a more peaceful society
Indicator 1.6.1Number of active UNDP-supported
women associations in conflict prevention and resolution 
agencies in communities; 
Baseline (2017): 0
Target (2023): 50 
Data source: LPC Annual reports 
Indicator 1.6.2. Number of active UNDP-supported
youth movements in conflict prevention/resolution in 
communitiesDP/DCP/TGO/3
Baseline (2017): 0
Target (2023): 50
Data source: LPC Annual reports 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP Pillar 3: Consolidate social development and strengthen inclusion mechanisms
UNDAF OUTCOME 3 INVOLVING UNDP: By 2023, Togolese populations have increased and equitable access to social protection, quality basic social services, including 
education, health, nutrition, water, hygiene and sanitation
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: End multidimensional poverty through integrated poverty reduction solutions
Indicator 2.1. Net primary 
school enrollment rate
Baseline (2017): 93.8%
Target (2022): 100%
Indicator 2.2: Proportion of 
households using a source 
of safe drinking water
Baseline (2015): 61.8%
Target (2022): 80%
Indicator 2.3: Youth 
underemployment rate
Baseline (2015): 22,2%
Target (2022): 16,2%
Indicator 2.4: Women 
underemployment rate
Baseline (2015): 24,1%
Target (2022): 18,1%
Health map report, Ministry of 
Health, annually
Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Survey (MICS), INSEED, Every 
3 years
MICS, INSEED, Every 3 years
QUIBB, INSEED
Every 3 years
QUIBB, INSEED
Every 3 years
Output 2.1: Quality social basic services particularly 
health, education, water and sanitation are made available 
to most vulnerable groups
Indicator 2.1.1 Number of UNDP-supported accessible 
infrastructures in a) health; b) education; c) water sectors
Baseline (2016): (a) 26; (b) 64; (c) 0
Target: (a)76; (b) 697; (c)1,700
Data source: PUDC Technical committee annual report
Indicator 2.1.4. Number of UNDP-supported villages 
benefiting from (a) solar street lights; (b) multifunctional 
community platforms
Baseline (2016): (a) 0; (b) 36
Target: (a) 200; (b) 76
Data source: PUDC Technical committee annual report 
Indicator 2.1.6. Number of people living in newly 
disenclaved areas
Baseline (2017): 250 000
Target: 500,000
Data source: PUDC Technical committee annual report
Output 2.2: National and local institutions and 
organizations have increased capacities to manage and
monitor social economic infrastructures and equipment 
for sustainable community development
Indicator 2.2.1: Extent to which national and local 
targeted institutions and organizations have technical/
financial capacities to manage/ monitor community 
facilities
Ministries in charge of:
-health, 
-education, 
-water and sanitation,
-employment,
-Infrastructures
-agriculture
-Finance and economy 
-development at the grassroots 
level, 
-vocational training
INSEED
National Agency for Local 
Development 
INNOV’UP Entrepreneurial Centre 
for Businesswomen of Togo
Regional Centre for technical 
Instruction and Professional 
Formation 
National Agency for Employment
ILO 
UNICEF
WHO
UNFPA
UNAIDS
AfDB
JICA
GIZ
Regular: 
$13,657,000
Other: 
$2,500,000
Government 
funding: 
$30,000, 000 
29 1: low capacities 2: Some capacities 3: significant capacities 4: adequate capacities
Baseline (2017)29: 1
Target: 3
Data source: PUDC Technical committee annual report
Output 2.3: Technical and operational capacities of 
professional organizations are strengthened for improved
competitiveness
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of UNDP-supported new 
community-based organizations of women, youth, farmers 
reinforced to develop gainful economic activities
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2023): 500
Data source: PUDC Technical committee annual report
Output 2.4: The supply of technical and vocational 
training is strengthened to improve access to decent 
employment for youth and women 
Indicator 2.4.1 Number of UNDP-supported partnerships 
built with the private sector for development of new 
curricula 
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 5
Data source: Annual reports of the Ministry of 
Vocational Training
Indicator 2.4.2: Number of UNDP-supported technical 
and vocational training centres with reinforced technical 
and operational capacities 
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 5
Data source: Ministry of Vocational Training annual 
reports 
Indicator 2.4.3: Percentage of (a) youth and (b) women 
supported who gained or created new jobs 
Baseline (2017): (a)0%; (b)0%
Target: (a)80%; (b)80%DP/DCP/TGO/3
 
30 1: few data-informed plans; 2: Some data-informed plans; 3: major data-informed plans; 4: all plans are data-informed
Data source: Ministry of Vocational Training annual 
reports 
Output 2.5: A labour market information system is in 
place and operational.
Indicator 2.5.1: Existence of a labour market 
information system
Baseline (2017): No
Target: Yes
Data source: Ministry of Vocational Training annual 
reports
Indicator 2.5.2: Number of reports on labour market 
published on time
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 5
Data source: Ministry of Vocational Training annual 
reports 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDP Pillar 3: Consolidate social development and strengthen inclusion mechanisms 
UNDAF OUTCOME 2 INVOLVING UNDP: By 2023, populations in vulnerable areas have increased resilience to climate change and disaster risks and have equitable access to 
decent living environment and sustainable natural and energy resources.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Respond to crises and accelerate recovery through integrated crisis solutions
Indicator 3.1: Proportion of 
renewable energy in final 
energy consumption (%)
Baseline (2013): 10%
Target (2022): 20%
Indicator 3.2: Forest cover 
rate.
Baseline (2016): 24.4%
Target : 24.94
Data source: Annual report of 
the Ministry of Energy
Data source: Annual report of 
the Ministry of Environment
Output 3.1: National institutions have increased capacities 
to formulate, implement and mobilize resources for waste 
management, climate, disaster and risk informed gender 
responsive sectoral development plans/policies 
Indicator 3.1.1: Extent to which data informed 
development plans incorporate integrated solutions to 
reduce disaster risks and enable climate change adaptation 
and mitigation and are gender-responsive 
Baseline (2018)30: 1
Target: 3
Data source: NCPA annual report
Ministries of:
-Environment 
- Energy 
NCPA, World Bank
GCF
GEF
GIZ
Regular:
$8,500,000
Other:
$21,400,000Indicator 3.1.2: Number of regional gender-sensitive 
contingency plans elaborated and tested with successful 
outcome.
Baseline (2018): 0
Target: 5
Data source: NCPA annual report 
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of new initiatives for sustainable 
waste management promoted
Baseline (2018): 0
Target: 5
Data source: Ministry of Environment annual report
Output 3.2: Solutions adopted to achieve universal access 
to clean, affordable and sustainable energy
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of women- and male-headed 
households in targeted areas benefiting from access to 
clean, affordable and sustainable energy 
Baseline (2017): Women-headed households: 3,096, 
Male-headed households: 8,904
Target: Women-headed households:3,656, male-headed 
households:10,594
Data source: PUDC technical committee annual report
Indicator 3.2.2: Percentage of coal producers using highefficiency carbonization techniques
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 30%
Data source: Ministry of Environment annual report
Indicator 3.2.3: Percentage of women charcoal producers 
converted to other high-income activities
Baseline (2017): 0
Target: 50%
Data source: Ministry of Environment annual report
Output 3.3 Vulnerable communities in areas highly 
exposed to natural hazards prone enabled to adapt to 
future disaster and climate change impactsDP/DCP/TGO/3
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of villages engaged in 
sustainable management of natural resources, forests and 
ecosystem services for resilience-building
Baseline (2017): 200
Target: 300
Data source: Ministry of Environment annual report