File Name: THA-NEP-1997-EN
Year: 1997
Country Name: Thailand
Country Code: THA
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1997
Start Year: nan
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

The energy sector in Thailand is managed by the National Energy Policy
Council (NEPC), established under the National Energy Policy Council Act, B.E.
2535 (1992), with the National Energy Policy Office (NEPO) acting as the
Secretariat. To enhance efficient energy sector management, the Energy Policy
Committee (EPC) has been established to assist with the work of the NEPC.
Additionally, the NEPC is responsible for the promotion of energy conservation
and the management of the Energy Conservation Promotion Fund as per the
Energy Conservation Promotion Act, B.E. 2535 (1992). Accordingly, the
Energy Conservation Promotion Fund Committee has been established to
assist with the management of the Fund and ensure that allocations are made
in compliance with the regulations stipulated in the Act.
Members of the above­mentioned governing bodies, their respective authority
and duties are summarized as follows:
1. The National Energy Policy Council (NEPC)
Members:
1. Prime Minister ­ Chairman
2. Deputy Prime Minister (as assigned by the Prime Minister) ­ Vice8. Minister of Agriculture and Cooperatives
9. Minister of Transport and Communications
10. Minister of Commerce
11. Minister of Interior
12. Minister of Science, Technology and Environment
13. Minister of Industry
14. Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Industry
15. Secretary­General of the Council of State
16. Secretary­General of the National Economic and Social Development
Board
17. Director of the Bureau of the Budget
18. Director­General of the Department of Energy Development and
Promotion
19. Secretary General of the National Energy Policy Council ­ Member and
Secretary
Authority and Duties:
1. To recommend national energy policies and national energy management
and development plans to the cabinet.
2. To set rules and conditions for prescribing energy prices in accordance
with national energy policies and national energy management and
development plans.
3. To monitor, supervise, co­ordinate, support and expedite the operations
of all committees with authority and duties related to energy, including
government agencies, state enterprises and the private sector, to ensure
that their operations are in accordance with national energy policies and
national energy management and development plans.
4. To evaluate the implementation of national energy policies and national
energy management and development plans.
5. To perform other functions as assigned by the Prime Minister or the
cabinet.
2. The Energy Policy Committee (EPC)
Members:
1. Minister to the Prime Minister's Office (as assigned by the Prime Minister)
­ Chairman
2. Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Industry
3. Secretary­General of the National Economic and Social Development
Board
4. Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Environment
5. Secretary­General of the Council of State (or Representative)
6Director­General of the Department of Energy Development and11. Governor of the Petroleum Authority of Thailand
12. Secretary General of the National Energy Policy Council ­ Member and
Secretary
13. Representative of the National Energy Policy Office ­ Member and
Assistant Secretary
Authority and Duties:
1. To recommend national energy policies and national energy management
and development plans to the NEPC.
2. To provide comments on the energy­related programs and projects of
various agencies and suggest priorities for such programs and projects.
3. To set petroleum prices and premium rates to be collected for the
Petroleum Fund.
4. To perform any other task as may be assigned by the Prime Minister with
regard to the management of the Petroleum Fund and other duties under
the Royal Decree on the Solution and Prevention of Petroleum Oil
Shortage, B.E. 2516 (1973).
5. To recommend policies and measures on energy pricing and monitor tariff
adjustments following the automatic adjustment mechanism.
6. To consider and recommend to the NEPC royal decrees, ministerial
regulations and other measures to be enacted under the Energy
Conservation Promotion Act.
7. To liaise with ministries, bureaus, departments, local administrations,
state enterprises and individuals to encourage proposals and technical
appraisals related to national energy policies and national energy
management and development plans.
8. To perform any other task as may be assigned by the NEPC or its
Chairman.
9. To appoint sub­committees to assist with particular tasks as deemed
necessary.
3. The Energy Conservation Promotion Fund
Committee
Members:
1. Deputy Prime Minister (as assigned by the Prime Minister) ­ Chairman
2. Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Environment
3. Secretary­General of the National Economic and Social Development
Board
4. Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Industry
5. Secretary­General of the Thai Industrial Standards Institute
6. Director­General of the Comptroller­General's DepartmentPatronage
12. Qualified persons (not more than seven, appointed by the Cabinet)
13. Secretary General of the National Energy Policy Council ­ Member and
Secretary
Authority and Duties:
1. To propose to the NEPC guidelines, criteria, conditions and priorities for
the disbursement of funds in accordance with the objectives prescribed
under Section 25 of the Energy Conservation Promotion Act, B.E. 2535
(the Act).
2. To allocate appropriations from the Fund in accordance with the
objectives prescribed in Section 25 of the Act, and ensure that they
conform to the guidelines, criteria, conditions and priorities prescribed by
the NEPC under Section 4 (4) of the Act.
3. To prescribe regulations on the criteria and procedures for submissions,
grants allocations or subsidies from the Fund.
4. To propose to the NEPC the rates to be imposed on petroleum for the
Fund.
5. To propose to the NEPC the types of petroleum that will be exempted
from these rates.
6. To prescribe those surcharges which are subject to the approval of the
NEPC.
7. To determine exceptional cases where surcharges should be exempted.
8. To consider for approval requests for financial assistance to promote
energy conservation projects under Section 40 (2) of the Act in
accordance with the guidelines, criteria and conditions prescribed by the
NEPC under Section 4 (8) of the Act.
9. To prescribe regulations on the criteria and procedures for making
requests for assistance under Section 41 of the Act.
10. To carry out other duties as prescribed under the Act.
4. The National Energy Policy Office (NEPO)
The National Energy Policy Office (NEPO) acts as the Secretariat to the NEPC.
The authority and duties of NEPO are derived from three pieces of legislation:
the National Energy Policy Council Act, B.E. 2535 (1992); the Royal Decree on
the Solution and Prevention of Petroleum Oil Shortage, B.E. 2516 (1973); and
the Energy Conservation Promotion Act, B.E. 2535 (1992). NEPO's role can be
summarized as follows:
1. To carry out duties as stipulated in the National Energy Policy Council Act,
B.E. 2535, and the Energy Conservation Promotion Act, B.E. 2535.
2. To develop policies, management and development plans and measures
related to Thailand’s energy sector in accordance with the National
Economic and Social Development Plan and government policies to be5. To recommend policies, management and development plans, and
measures related to tariff structures, demand side management and load
management.
6. To recommend policies, management and development plans, and
measures related to new and renewable energy.
7. To provide comments on energy research and on funding requests from
the Energy Conservation Promotion Fund for energy­related research.
8. To co­ordinate and co­operate with international organizations and
foreign agencies in energy related matters.
9. To implement systems for the collection and processing of the information
and statistics related to the energy sector.
10. To perform any other task as stipulated in relevant legislation, or as may
be assigned by the Prime Minister or the cabinet.
Energy Policy and Planning Division
Last Updated 15 October 1997