File Name: THA-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Thailand
Country Code: THA
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January–4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
2 December 2021
Original: English
2117875X (E) 061221
First regular session 2022
31 January–4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Kingdom 
of Thailand (2022–2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Thailand (2022–2026) ..................................................... 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Thailand has transitioned from a low-income to an upper-middle-income country in less than 
a generation. Over the past 20 years, the country has maintained high foreign reserves, low 
inflation, a sound banking system and a stable exchange rate. Combined with an openness to 
trade, financial flows, labour migration and investments in both human and physical capital, these 
advances have facilitated high levels of growth in gross domestic product (GDP) and significant 
reductions in poverty.1 Thailand’s Human Development Index is 0.777, though after adjustment 
for inequality, it falls to 0.646, a 16.9 per cent loss. Its Gender Development Index is 1.008.
2. Thailand's economic growth has slowed during the past five years, with a GDP growth rate 
of 2.3 per cent to 4.2 per cent. In 2015, the government set a goal, based on the Thailand 4.0 
policy initiative,
2
to achieve high-income status by 2032. 
3. COVID-19 has disrupted Thailand’s economic transformation and progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals). The country’s GDP contracted by 6.1 per cent in 
2020,
3
affecting all sectors, especially tourism. The informal sector, employing approximately 
20.36 million people (53.7 percent of total employment),
4 was hit particularly hard. The sectors 
most affected by COVID-19 are those with a high proportion of informal female workers, including 
food services (66 per cent), manufacturing (57 per cent) and wholesale and retail trade (53 per cent).
4. Despite the government’s swift and comprehensive response to COVID-19, including a $58 
billion stimulus package for social protection and economic rehabilitation, the prolonged 
pandemic worsened the conditions of vulnerable groups. Before the pandemic, Thailand was 
making progress on the Goals, though facing challenges related to food security, climate action 
and sustainable use of marine resources.
5 However, COVID-19 is hampering progress in 
reducing poverty and inequality and improving education quality. This particularly affects
vulnerable groups, such as women, youth, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex 
(LGBTQI) people, ethnic minorities and people with disability.
5. The pandemic has revealed vulnerabilities in the Thai economy, which relies heavily on 
foreign exports and tourism, and depends on natural resources and biodiversity. Three key 
challenges emerged: inequality, deterioration of the ecosystem and lagging development of 
human capital. Thailand’s inequality of opportunity score is below the regional average,
6
and 
income disparity is a critical problem. The pandemic is likely to increase the incidence of poverty. 
While the country’s poverty rate fell from 65.17 per cent in 1988 to 6.24 per cent in 2019, it grew 
from 7.21 per cent to 9.85 per cent during the 2015-2018 period. The absolute number of people 
living in poverty increased from 4.85 million to 6.68 million due to declining income among the 
poorest households.
7 Some of the root causes lie in gender inequality, lack of equal opportunity, 
the digital divide and social discrimination against some vulnerable groups.
6. Combined with climate change, Thailand’s reliance on natural resources and biodiversity 
threaten conservation efforts. The country’s susceptibility to natural disasters exacerbates 
economic vulnerability, including in the agricultural sector. In addition, Thailand is the tenth 
largest contributor to marine waste,
8
and the lockdown from the pandemic has led to an increase 
1 United Nations, ‘Common Country Analysis’, draft, March 2021.
2 Thailand 4.0 is an economic model with four objectives: economic prosperity, social well-being, raising human values and 
environmental protection.
3 World Bank, ‘Thailand Economic Monitor July 2021: The road to recovery’, 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/thailand/publication/thailand-economic-monitor-july-2021-the-road-to-recovery
4 National Statistical Office, ‘The Informal Employment Survey’, 2020.
5 United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UNESCAP), ‘Snapshot of Thailand 2019-2020’, 
SDG Gateway.
6 UNESCAP, ‘Inequality in Asia and the Pacific in the era of the 2030 agenda for sustainable development’, SDG Gateway, 2018. in plastic pollution. The country’s ambition of achieving a low-carbon economy may be 
threatened by diversion of resources to economic production in support of pandemic recovery. 
7. Transforming Thailand’s economy requires further development of human capital so
capacities and skills are aligned with Thailand 4.0 and able to respond to a rapid demographic 
transition. In 2020, 15.1 per cent of youth were not in employment, education or training, and for 
women the figure was 18.5 per cent, compared to 11.8 per cent of men.
9
Investment in digital 
infrastructure and literacy is critical to close the digital divide and create job opportunities.
8. Thailand’s 20-year National Strategy is focused on “becoming a developed country with 
security, prosperity and sustainability in accordance with the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy”, 
which emphasizes balance, resilience, knowledge and integrity. The country is finalizing its 13th 
National Economic and Social Development Plan (13th plan, 2022-2027) in support of a highvalue economy and sustainable society with 13 priorities in 4 categories: high-value, eco-friendly 
economy; society of opportunities and equality; sustainable way of life; and supporting factors 
for transformation.
10
9. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2022-
2026 complements Thailand’s priorities. The UNDP country programme aims to support the 
milestones outlined in the 13th plan. The programme is structured around three linked outcomes 
in the UNSDCF: (a) accelerating Thailand’s transformation into an inclusive economy based on 
green, resilient, low-carbon, sustainable development; (b) creating the human capital needed for 
social and inclusive development; and (c) increasing the ability of people living in Thailand, 
especially vulnerable people, to participate in and benefit from development, free from 
discrimination. 
10. UNDP’s contribution to the 13th Plan and the UNSDCF reflects its comparative advantages. 
UNDP co-leads two outcome groups, one on green, resilient, low-carbon sustainable 
development and one on leaving no one behind, as well as the United Nations Gender Working 
Group. UNDP’s approach builds on complementarities among United Nations organizations. Six 
principles guide programme implementation: (a) localizing the Goals; (b) developing solutions 
with multiplier effects across the 2030 agenda; (c) promoting a whole-of-government and wholeof-society approach; (d) prioritizing leave no one behind; (e) enhancing gender equality and (f)
supporting risk-informed development.
11. With its integrator role, UNDP is a long-standing and trusted government partner. It works 
with a rich network of civil society, private sector and global partners; has a strong footprint in
communities across the country; and is strategically positioned to support the country’s structural 
transformation. UNDP will make use of its six signature solutions, enhanced by innovation, 
digitalization and development financing. The Accelerator Lab and Thailand Policy Lab are 
important platforms to link these solutions to policy through a human-centred and gendersensitive approach.
12. The country programme evaluation in 2021 found that UNDP is well positioned to respond 
to Thailand’s needs, and that partners perceive it as able to provide tangible support, particularly 
in localizing the Goals.11 This has led to a stronger UNDP emphasis at subnational level. The 
new programme will emphasize scaling up successful initiatives and expanding work on 
entrepreneurship, youth engagement and capacity-building of local authorities and communities. 
Funding sources will be further diversified with an emphasis on sustainability. UNDP will 
explore strategies to strengthen rights-based efforts to localize the Goals, support the government 
in translating national policy into subnational interventions, increase public participation in 
policy decision-making and promote coordination among ministries as well as between central 
9
ILOSTAT, ‘Global employment trends for youth 2020’.and subnational entities. An integrated information system will be established to monitor and 
evaluate development results against the government’s plan and the Goals.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
13. The new country programme has six outputs contributing to the three mutually reinforcing 
development outcomes under the UNSDCF, highlighting the links between people, planet and 
prosperity: (a) Innovative solutions to increase biodiversity conservation and resilience; (b) an 
enabling environment to support economic development that is green, circular, inclusive, gender
responsive and low carbon; (c) strengthened capacity for digital transformation; (d) dialogues 
that foster human rights and equality; (e) engagement of vulnerable groups in decision-making 
bodies and processes at national and local levels; and (f) access by vulnerable groups to quality 
socioeconomic services and justice.
Outcome 1: Thailand’s transformation into an inclusive economy based on green, resilient, 
low-carbon, sustainable development is accelerated.
14. Two outputs are crucial in support of Thailand’s transformation: increase in biodiversity 
conservation and resilience, and an enabling environment to support a green, circular, inclusive, 
gender-responsive and low-carbon economic development. Attention must be paid to the 
connections between human development and economic growth, human rights and 
environmental protection. These will contribute directly to milestones 2, 10 and 11 of the 13th
Plan, addressing sustainable tourism, circularity, a low-carbon society and adaptation to and 
reduction of natural disaster risks. This will improve the resilience of the country. UNDP will 
galvanize its partnerships with stakeholders such as the Office of National Economic and Social 
Development Council, Ministry of Finance, Budget Bureau, Ministry of Natural Resources and
Environment, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Bank of Thailand, Thai Bankers’
Association and academic institutions.
15. UNDP will leverage its signature solutions on environment, resilience and gender to support 
gender-responsive and inclusive solutions in national and subnational climate plans and actions 
and will work to strengthen biodiversity conservation to increase resilience. This will support the 
government’s policy on bio-circular-green economy and low-carbon economic development. 
16. Support will be continued in relation to the nationally determined contribution within the 
framework of UNDP’s Climate Promise. This will improve plastic waste management; address 
air pollution, including its health implications; promote risk-informed development and effective 
disaster risk management; and, with the financial support of the Green Climate Fund, strengthen 
climate resilience in marine and coastal areas in the Gulf of Thailand. The emphasis there will 
be on strengthening the resilience of coastal and other communities at risk of being left behind. 
17. Building on ongoing efforts, UNDP aims to promote biodiversity-based sustainable tourism 
with funding support from the Global Environment Facility and to enhance climate resilience 
through effective water management, sustainable agriculture and coral reef conservation. Using 
the UNDP Accelerator Lab and the Thailand Policy Lab, UNDP interventions at local level will 
be scaled up.
18. In addition to sectoral ministries, partnerships will be formed with provincial and local 
administrations, academia, the media and civil society to provide local, evidence-based solutions 
that are green, inclusive and gender sensitive. Civil society and community-based organizations, 
including those representing women and ethnic minorities, will be engaged, contributing to the 
economic empowerment of these groups, with support from the Global Environment Facility’s 
Small Grants Programme. Experiences and expertise on nature-based solutions and climate 
actions will be shared through South-South cooperation. 
19. Green and inclusive financial solutions, including gender-responsive budgeting, will be an 
important priority in climate and biodiversity financingas part of UNDP’s support for financing that will encompass work under the biodiversity finance programme and climate financing 
framework. 
20. UNDP will co-create participatory mechanisms and enhance the capacities of youth and 
vulnerable groups to contribute to policies, laws and programmes and support equitable sharing 
of benefits from Thailand’s green, low-carbon and resilient transformation. Several initiatives 
with United Nations partners are envisaged, including on youth empowerment, helping Thailand
cope with the impacts of climate change in the agriculture sector, electric mobility and in support 
of a green and inclusive COVID-19 economic recovery. UNDP will complement its engagement
at subnational level by strengthening its ongoing collaboration with the German development 
agency GIZ and the Asian Development Bank to benefit from their technical expertise and 
ongoing programmes in climate resilience and Goals financing.
21. UNDP will strengthen its engagement with the private sector, reflecting its crucial role in 
socioeconomic transformation. The aim is to encourage adoption of low-carbon, green, circular
and inclusive practices and to promote business integrity and respect for human rights. This 
collaboration will build on existing partnerships with the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
Global Compact Network Thailand, Stock Exchange of Thailand, Thai Chamber of Commerce
and Federation of Thai Industries. The existing partnership with the Federation of Professional 
Business Women will be sustained to strengthen women’s leadership. 
Outcome 2: Human capital for social and inclusive development is improved by
strengthening institutions and partnerships and empowering people.
22. To support human capital development, UNDP will emphasize strengthening capacity of 
state and non-state actors to support Thailand’s digital transformation, which will improve
delivery of quality services. Digital transformation will help accelerate COVID-19 economic 
recovery by increasing economic transactions, particularly for farmers and small entrepreneurs 
in remote areas. It will also help to close the socioeconomic gap between urban and rural areas 
and between generations. 
23. UNDP will accordingly focus on four areas to encourage digital transformation: public 
sector operating systems, people’s digital literacy, digital infrastructure and digital platforms.
Interventions in these areas will contribute to milestones 6, 12 and 13 of the 13th Plan, related to 
digital services, a skilled labour force and an efficient public sector.
24. As part of this, UNDP will support the formulation of policies and strengthen public sector
capacities to utilize digital technology and e-governance to deliver services for all, including 
through digital procurement, fostering integrity and transparency. The emphasis will be on 
ensuring that inclusivity and digital solutions are incorporated into policy design and 
interventions to inform climate actions, improve service delivery, reduce inequalities and 
accelerate Thailand’s achievement of the Goals. For this work, UNDP will leverage its
partnership with the Office of the National Economic and Social Development Council, Thailand 
Institute of Justice, Comptroller’s General Department, National Innovation Agency, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperatives, and Office of the Public Sector Commission, complemented by
technical assistance from the United Kingdom Government Digital Service.
25. Digital literacy is a key accelerator of human capital development, central to transforming the 
Thai economy. UNDP will focus on promoting training opportunities and employability for all 
people, in particular for people with disability and the LGBTQI community. This will include
strengthening their digital capacities and improving their access to financing. The existing 
partnership with the Ministry of Social Development and Human Security will be leveraged to 
ensure gender-responsive policies and services reach the most vulnerable, including women with 
disability and from ethnic communities. Academia, civil society and the private sector, including 
social enterprises, will be engaged to promote income-generating opportunities.
26. UNDP will support the formulation of public policies and partnerships with the private sector social innovation, UNDP will work to co-create models for engaging civil society, the private sector 
and the government at the subnational level in providing user-friendly digital services to improve 
access to public services. Good practices and solutions will be scaled up and shared with other 
countries through the UNDP Accelerator Lab and the Thailand Policy Lab. 
Outcome 3: People living in Thailand, especially those at risk of being left furthest behind, 
are able to participate in and benefit from development, free from discrimination.
27. To ensure that no one is left behind and to contribute to a high-opportunity society, UNDP 
will give priority to three outputs: (a) engagement of state and non-state actors in social dialogues 
and practices that foster human rights and equality; (b) empowerment of vulnerable groups, 
particularly women, LGBTQI groups, youth, elderly people, ethnic minorities and people with 
disability, to engage in decision-making bodies and processes at national and local levels; and 
(c) improved access by vulnerable groups to quality socioeconomic services and justice. This
will contribute directly to milestones 7, 8 and 9 of the 13th Plan related to reducing inequalities, 
improving access to public services, promoting upward mobility and strengthening
accountability between citizens and state.
28. Leveraging its signature solutions on governance, poverty and gender, UNDP will support 
strengthening the capacity of public institutions and civil society in participatory planning and 
implementing policy on inclusive social services and protection. This work will also address
gender-responsive and inclusive service delivery, especially for people at risk of being left 
behind. In partnership with the Parliament, Human Rights Commission, National Municipal 
League of Thailand and other state and non-state actors, UNDP will support the advancement of 
human rights, equality and non-discrimination. It will help to improve the delivery of services at 
the local level by strengthening its engagement with provincial and local administrative offices, 
communities and the private sector to foster responsible business. 
29. To eliminate discrimination, a root cause of exclusion and human rights violations, UNDP 
will address social norms and enhance institutional capacity of state and non-state actors at 
national and subnational level. It will advocate to raise public awareness on equity and diversity 
to increase understanding of the rights of vulnerable groups and to reduce stigma. Partnerships
with United Nations organizations will be strengthened to mainstream social diversity in policies 
and programmes. This will ensure inclusion of vulnerable groups in decision-making processes, 
including in the southern border provinces, building on UNDP’s longstanding support to the 
region’s development. Academic institutions, civil society and the media, such as the Thai Public 
Broadcasting Service, will be important partners.
30. In partnership with the National Security Council and with the technical expertise of the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
UNDP will continue its support to Thailand in developing and implementing an inclusive and 
gender-responsive national action plan to prevent violent extremism, which will also address 
climate security. Continued efforts will be made to promote the United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights and the Standards of Conduct for Business in tackling 
discrimination against the LGBTQI community, address gender discrimination and strengthen 
transparency and integrity. These efforts will be conducted in partnership with the Ministry of 
Justice, Ministry of Social Development and Human Security, National Human Rights 
Commission, National Anti-Corruption Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, 
Stock Exchange of Thailand, Global Compact Network of Thailand, civil society and the 
business community. 
31. UNDP will empower vulnerable groups through leadership and skills development. It will
use digital tools to raise awareness and improve access to information related to political, social, 
economic and environmental rights. UNDP will facilitate partnerships between state and nonstate actors to promote dialogue and meaningful participation of vulnerable groups in decisionmaking bodies, with a goal of identifying integrated development solutions at national and Human Security, Ministry of Interior, Parliament, civil society and provincial and local 
administrations to strengthen social cohesion.
32. To improve vulnerable groups’ access to quality socioeconomic services and justice, UNDP 
will engage with national and subnational partners, including the judiciary, to strengthen their 
capacities to deliver inclusive and gender-responsive services and provide equal and affordable 
access to justice. New public and private financing strategies will be explored to mobilize 
resources to take advantage of the rich social capital, local wisdom and giving nature of the Thai 
people. To increase economic self-reliance among vulnerable groups, UNDP will promote 
equitable access to financial services and income-generating opportunities, including by
expanding social entrepreneurship, with an emphasis on the informal sector. Digital solutions 
will be introduced to make service delivery more inclusive, promote integrity and transparency,
and ensure the rights of all people are protected and promoted. 
33. Interventions under these three outputs will be undertaken at national and subnational levels. 
At subnational level, this work will contribute to localizing the Goals by facilitating inclusive 
platforms to engage multiple stakeholders around the pillars of the Goals Roadmap approved by 
the National Committee on Sustainable Development.
III. Programme and risk management
34. This country programme document outlines UNDP’s contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the 
organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
35. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. 
Harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United 
Nations agencies to manage financial risks, building on the macro-assessment conducted by 
UNDP. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will 
be charged to the concerned projects.
36. COVID-19 has resulted in a socioeconomic crisis that is hampering Thailand’s achievement 
of the Goals. The government’s comprehensive response package, including cash handouts to 
the most vulnerable groups, has reduced fiscal space and forced reprogramming of public 
expenditure. This could require diversion of resources away from productive green investments. 
The existing climate crisis, threats to the country’s biodiversity, vulnerability to natural disasters, 
political and social tensions, and an aging society could challenge the country’s ambition for a 
sustainable recovery and achievement of the Goals. 
37. To address these challenges, UNDP will continue working with state and non-state actors at 
national and subnational levels, advocating for a rights-based development agenda that leaves no 
one behind, strengthens social cohesion and improves the balance between people and planet. 
This should ensure a conducive environment for implementation of the country’s bio-circulargreen economic model and development priorities, inspired by the principles of the Sufficiency
Economy Philosophy and the 2030 agenda. Particular attention will be given to groups with 
multiple vulnerabilities. In partnership with the Thailand International Cooperation Agency, 
UNDP will support South-South cooperation to identify solutions and share lessons with other 
countries, including the contribution of the Sufficiency Economy Philosophy to achievement of 
the Goals. 
38. To ensure financial sustainability, UNDP will work to diversify its partnerships and funding 
base, emphasizing domestic resources from the public and private sectors and non-traditional complementarity. If faced with challenges in mobilizing resources, UNDP will adjust targets and 
reduce the scope of its interventions. To ensure sustainability of results, UNDP will prioritize
working with existing systems and mechanisms to foster national ownership and long-term
impact.
39. Leveraging UNDP’s expertise in its six signature solutions and building on the enabling 
power of innovation, digitalization and development financing, UNDP will continue to provide 
integrated development solutions informed by the lessons from its global network to help
Thailand achieve stronger resilience and structural transformation. The goal is a sustainable 
recovery and achievement of the Goals, leaving no one behind. UNDP will institutionalize
mechanisms to ensure systematic engagement and consultation with vulnerable groups 
throughout implementation of the programme. Working with United Nations Volunteers, UNDP 
will foster volunteerism to promote broad-based national ownership, gender equality, inclusive 
participation and sustainability.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
40. In alignment with the UNSDCF and the 13th national five-year plan, UNDP will use 
innovative data collection and monitoring methods, including collective intelligence, micronarratives and user-generated feedback. The goal is to identify and better target those left behind,
monitor progress towards development outcomes and capture transformational results, in addition 
to using national data for reporting. Capacities will be enhanced in the National Statistical Office, 
particularly on the Goals indicators where data gaps are more pronounced,
12 and for which UNDP 
is acting as a custodian, to support monitoring and real-time decision-making. 
41. Consistent with recommendations from the country programme evaluation, UNDP will 
embed a robust evidence-based monitoring and evaluation system in the programme and its 
projects, combining qualitative and quantitative data. At least 3 per cent of the programme budget 
will be made available for monitoring, evaluation and communication of results. Based on budget 
availability, accessibility-related costs will be allocated to ensure inclusion of persons with 
disability. UNDP will support implementing partners to collect robust data, which will be verified 
through staff or independent monitoring systems, including field visits and surveys. Citizen and 
beneficiary feedback will be solicited to validate UNDP’s impact and comparative advantages.
42. Annual planning and multi-year goal-setting will be undertaken in partnership with the 
government by establishing a governance mechanism (programme board) with stakeholder 
representation. The harmonized approach to cash transfers, spot checks and financial audits will 
complement regular programme monitoring for stakeholders. The costed evaluation plan 
indicates project, programme and thematic evaluations to be undertaken to ensure learning and 
accountability. UNDP will set up mechanisms to track and support meaningful participation in 
decision-making by vulnerable groups, particularly women, LGBTQI groups, youth, elderly 
people, ethnic minorities and people with disability. Systematic use of the gender marker will 
continue, to monitor expenditures related to gender-responsive interventions and to improve 
gender-based planning. At least 15 per cent of the programme budget will be allocated to genderrelated interventions and monitoring of them.Annex. Results and resources framework for Thailand (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Draft 13th National Economic and Social Development Plan – Milestone 1: Thailand is a leading country in high-value agricultural and processed 
food products. Milestone 2 – Thailand is a tourist destination that prioritizes value and sustainability. Milestone 10 – Thailand has a circular economy and is a low-carbon 
society. Milestone 11 – Thailand can adapt to and reduce the risk of natural disasters.
UNSDCF Outcome 1/UNDP Outcome 1: Thailand’s transformation into an inclusive economy based on a green, resilient, low carbon, sustainable development is accelerated.
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: OUTCOME 1 – Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
UNSDCF outcome 
indicators
Data source, frequency of 
data collection Indicative country programme outputs Major partners
Indicative 
resources 
(USD)
Indicator 3: Number and 
percentage of public 
companies listed under 
Stock Exchange of Thailand 
Sustainability Investment
Baseline (2020): 25%
Target (2027): 124 
companies, 19.2% (124/646 
companies)
Indicator 5: Number of 
financial institutions 
adopting United Nations
sustainable finance 
principles
Baseline (2020): 3
Target (2027): 6
Indicator 8: Proportion of 
local governments that 
adopt and implement local 
disaster risk reduction 
strategies in line with 
national disaster risk 
reduction strategies (Goals
indicator 11.b.1)
Baseline (2020): 60%
Target (2027): 80%
Source: National Economic 
and Social Development 
Council, Asia Development 
Bank, World Bank, National 
Science and Technology 
Development Agency,
Ministry of Education,
Stock Exchange of Thailand,
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Cooperatives, United Nations 
Environment Programme
Finance Initiative-Principle 
for Responsible Investment,
Ministry of Energy, Ministry 
of Natural Resources and 
Environment, Ministry of 
Interior 
Frequency: Annually 
Output 1.1: Gender-responsive and inclusive 
solutions in national and subnational climate actions 
and biodiversity conservation are strengthened for 
increased resilience
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of financial mechanisms, 
including the integrated national financing framework 
and climate and biodiversity finance, in place to 
support implementation of gender-responsive and 
inclusive climate actions and biodiversity conservation 
Baseline (2021): 2
Target (2026): 6 
Source: Reports on integrated national financing 
framework, climate finance and other financial 
mechanisms to be developed 
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of climate action and 
biodiversity conservation solutions implemented and 
sustained that are gender responsive and inclusive at 
national and subnational levels
Baseline (2021): 3 
Target (2026): 10 
Source: Biodiversity-Based Economy Development 
Office, provincial and local government plans 
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of best practices on climate 
action and biodiversity conservation shared with other 
countries 
Baseline (2021):3 
Target (2026): 10 
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of 
Natural Resources and 
Environment, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperatives,
Ministry of Interior, National 
Statistical Office, Thai Chamber 
of Commerce, Federation of Thai 
Industries, Thai Bankers’ 
Association, Budget Bureau,
Bank of Thailand, Securities and 
Exchange Commission,
Tourism Association of Thailand, 
local administrative 
organizations, civil society,
private sector, academia,
United Nations organizations
Regular:
$500,000
Other: 
$47,776,000Source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, UNDP report on 
South-South cooperation 
Indicator 1.1.4: Number of provinces and local 
administration implementing a whole-of-government 
and whole-of-society approach to foster green, low-
emission, climate-resilient, inclusive and gender-
sensitive growth
Baseline(2021): 10 
Target(2026): 30 
Source: Provincial and local development plans
Indicator 1.1.5: Area of terrestrial and marine 
protected areas under improved management practices 
(link to Strategic Plan indicator 4.1.2)
Baseline(2021): Not available
Target(2026): 5.8 million hectares additional to the 
baseline Source: Surveys
Output 1.2: Improved enabling environment and 
private sector practices to support green, circular, 
inclusive, gender-responsive and low-carbon 
economic development
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of innovative initiatives 
adopted by the private sector that foster green and 
circular development
Baseline(2021): 5 
Target(2026): 10 
Source: Memorandums of understanding and 
collaborations with private sector partners; Biodiversity 
Finance Plan for Thailand 
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of national and subnational 
policies and solutions that have been co-designed and 
drafted with private sector and vulnerable groups to 
support Thailand’s low-carbon and resilient 
transformation
Baseline(2021): 3 
Target(2026): 8
Source: Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Cooperatives, Ministry of Social Development and Human Security; provincial, district and local 
government planning committees
NATIONAL PRORITY: Draft 13th National Economic and Social Development Plan: Milestone 6 – Thailand is the Association of Southeast Asian Nations’ hub of smart 
electronic gadget manufacturing and digital services. Milestone 12 – Thailand has skilled workers with desire to learn and forward mindset. Milestone 13 – Thailand has a 
highly efficient public sector.
UNSDCF Outcome 2/UNDP Outcome 2: Human capital needed for social and inclusive development is improved through strengthening of institutions, partnerships and the 
empowerment of people
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development
Indicator 17: Egovernment development 
index covering provision of 
online services, 
telecommunication 
connectivity and human 
capacity
Baseline (2020): 0.7565;
rank, 57
Target (2023-2027): Rank,
top 50
Indicator 18: Global 
Innovation Index (covering 
institution, human capital 
and research, infrastructure, 
market sophistication, 
business sophistication, 
knowledge and technology 
output, and creative output)
Baseline (2020): 36.68;
rank, 44 
Target (2027): rank, 40
Source: Bank of Thailand, 
Ministry of Finance, Ministry 
of Education, National 
Statistical Office, 
International 
Telecommunications Union, 
World Health Organization 
Global Youth Tobacco 
Survey, Ministry of Public 
Health, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Cooperatives,
Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS,
Global Innovation Index
Frequency: Annually (except
Ministry of Education, every 
three years)
Output 2.1: Strengthened capacity of state and nonstate actors to support Thailand’s digital 
transformation and innovation for improving access 
and delivery of quality services 
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of recommendations 
integrated into policies and practices for improved and 
inclusive e-government services formulated at national 
and subnational level
Baseline (2021) 9 
Target (2026): 20
Source: Reports on e-government services, provincial 
and local government development reports, capacity 
self-assessment among state and non-state actors 
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of vulnerable people with 
strengthened digital skills who have improved or
sustained their socioeconomic status, disaggregated by 
sex, gender identity, age group, ethnicity and type of 
disability
Baseline (2021): 550 
Target (2026): 5,000 (2,200 men, 2,800 women; 10% 
people with disability)
Source: Surveys 
Indicator 2.1.3: Number of sustained public-private 
initiatives on digital innovation that improve quality 
and inclusiveness of services for vulnerable groups 
(linked to Strategic Plan indicator E.1.2)
Ministry of Higher Education,
Ministry of Labour, Ministry of 
Social Development and Human 
Security, National Economic and 
Social Development Council,
Ministry of Digital Economy and 
Society, Digital Government 
Agency, Securities and Exchange 
Commission, National Innovation 
Agency, National Statistical 
Office, provincial line agencies,
local administrative 
organizations, National Human 
Rights Commission, Global 
Compact Network Thailand,
Stock Exchange, National 
Municipal League, civil society,
private sector, United Nations 
organizations
Regular: 
$1,441,000
Other: 
$6,910,000Baseline (2021): 3 
Target (2026): 20
Source: UNDP Accelerator Lab reports, Department of 
the Empowerment of People with Disabilities reports
Indicator 2.1.4: Number of people accessing digital 
platforms designed to increase connectivity, learning, 
and cross-sectoral collaboration for improved access 
and delivery of quality services (linked to Strategic 
Plan indicator E.1.3)
Baseline (2021): not available
Target (2026): 100,000 (40,000 men, 60,000 women; 
10% people with disabilities)
Source: Monitoring and verification reports, surveys 
NATIONAL PRORITY: Draft 13th National Economic and Social Development Plan: Milestone 7 – Reduce inequality between large businesses and small and medium-size 
enterprises; Milestone 8 – Reduce spatial inequality in terms of economy and access to quality public services; Milestone 9 – Facilitate upward social mobility and reduce 
income and wealth disparities
UNSDCF Outcome 3/UNDP Outcome 3: People living in Thailand, especially those at risk of being left furthest behind, are able to participate in and benefit from 
development, free from all forms of discrimination.
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 No one left behind, centering on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development
Indicator 23 / Goals 
indicator 1.2.1: Proportion 
of population living below 
the national poverty line, by 
sex, age and migratory 
status
Baseline (2019): 6.24%
Target (2027): 3%
Indicator 25: Gender wage 
gap, measured by 
female/male earning ratio 
for similar work 
Baseline (2021): 0.814; 
rank, 12 out of 156 
countries (lower is better) 
Target (2027): 0.825 
Indicator 27: Average 
score of provincial Goals
Data source: 
World Economic Forum;
Ministry of Labor;
National Statistical Office;
National Economic and Social 
Development Council; World 
Bank; United Nations 
Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific
Frequency: Annually
Output 3.1: State and non-state actors engage in 
social dialogues and adopt practices that foster 
human rights and equality for a just and inclusive 
society
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of approved provincial and 
local government development plans that integrate 
principles that foster human rights, equality and nondiscrimination in all its forms (linked to Strategic Plan 
indicator 2.2.1)
Baseline (2021): 12 
Target (2026): 35
Source: Provincial plans, local government plans
Indicator 3.1.2: Percentage of non-state actors 
participating in platforms on human rights and equality, 
Ministry of Justice, Ministry of 
Interior, Ministry of Social 
Development and Human 
Security, Ministry of Digital 
Economy and Society, Ministry 
of Labour, National Economic 
and Social Development Council,
Election Commission,
Parliament, National Human 
Rights Commission, National 
Statistical Office, Department of 
Community Development, Bank 
of Thailand, Thai Bankers 
Association, media, academia,
non-governmental organizations,
civil society, organizations for 
people with disability, private 
sector, United Nations 
organizations
Regular:
$500,000
Other:
$10,540,000index (based on 24 
provincial economic, social 
and environmental Goals
indicators)
Baseline (2019): 52.87% 
(13th Plan Goals Index)
Target (2027): 55%
Indicator 30: Availability 
rate of Goals indicator data 
(Proxy for Strategic Plan 
indicator 17.18.1)
Baseline (2020): 51%
Target (2027): 55%
inclusive culture and rights-based development 
approach 
Baseline (2021): 20%
Target (2026): 40%
Source: Board meeting minutes, surveys 
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of changes in approved public 
policies that address the needs of vulnerable groups 
Baseline (2021): 14
Target (2026): 25 
Source: National Economic and Social Development 
Council, Thailand Policy Lab reports, Royal Gazette, 
cabinet resolutions
Indicator 3.1.4: Number of vulnerable people with 
improved and sustained livelihoods after skills
enhancement 
Baseline (2021): 5000 
Target (2026): 12000 (men:5000; women: 7000; 10% 
people with disabilities)
Source: Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Social 
Development and Human Security, Department of 
Community Development
Output 3.2: Vulnerable groups, particularly women, 
LGBTQI, youth, ethnic minorities, and people with 
disabilities, are empowered to engage in decisionmaking bodies and processes at national and local 
levels
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of inclusive parliamentary 
forums providing opportunity for citizens, especially vulnerable groups, to speak and influence policymaking 
(linked to Strategic Plan indicator 2.4.1)
Baseline(2021): 1 
Target(2026): 15
Source: Parliamentary reports, minutes of meetings of 
consultations
Indicator 3.2.2: Percentage of vulnerable people with 
improved opportunities to engage with decision-
making bodies at national and subnational levels
Baseline(2021):Not available
Target(2026): 30% of the estimate of vulnerable 
people Source:
Surveys 
Output 3.3: Vulnerable groups have improved 
access to quality socioeconomic services and justice
Indicator 3.3.1: Strategies and models developed and 
implemented to improve the quality and accessibility of 
justice and socioeconomic services, particularly for 
vulnerable populations
Baseline(2021): 18 
Target(2026): 40 
Source: Provincial development reports
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of vulnerable people with 
improved access to financial services 
Baseline(2021): 180 
Target(2026): 10,000 (4,500 men,5,500 women; 10% 
people with disability)
Source: Bank of Thailand financial access survey
Indicator 3.3.3: Number of vulnerable people who are 
accessing justice services (linked to Strategic Plan 
indicator 2.2.3)
Baseline(2021): Not available
Target(2026):3,500 (1,500 men, 2,000 women; 10% 
people with disability) Source: Monitoring reports