File Name: TJK-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Tajikistan
Country Code: TJK
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August to 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for Project 
Services
Distr.: General
27 June 2022
Original: English
2210289X (E) 210722
Second regular session 2022
29 August to 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Tajikistan (2023-2026)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management..................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Tajikistan (2023-2026)………………….…………………… 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development
Cooperation Framework
1. Tajikistan is a landlocked lower middle-income country1 with population of 9.5 million 
people bordering Afghanistan, China, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. Three quarters of the 
population live in rural areas. The country ranks 125th out of 189 countries on the Human 
Development Index,
2 with a Gender Development Index score of 0.823.3 Since independence
in 1991, Tajikistan achieved important development gains, peace and stability. The national 
poverty rate decreased from 83 per cent in 2000 to 26.3 per cent in 2019. Real Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) grew from $6.5 billion US dollars in 2011 to $ 8.2 billion in 2020, 
with an average growth rate of 7 per cent.
4
2. Inequalities remain high within population groups and between urban and rural areas. 
7.4 per cent of the population is poor5 while vulnerability to multidimensional poverty 
reached 20.1 per cent (7 per cent in urban and 24.3 per cent in rural areas).
6 Food insecurity 
and access to reliable, sustainable energy remain important development challenges.
3. The government recognizes the private sector is a key driver of economic growth in 
Tajikistan and important progress was made in improving the investment climate. 
Regardless, the cost of starting a business remains relatively high. Limited economic 
diversification and employment opportunities explain the size of the informal economy7
and large number of workers who migrate to Russia.8
4. The government has taken bold steps towards integrating the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) in national policies and development plans. The National Development Strategy 
(NDS) 2030 aims to improve standards of living for the population through a planned 
transition to an industrial-agrarian economy.
9 Although the process of sub-national 
development started under the NDS, and regional GDP per capita increased, reforms were 
largely concentrated at the central level and regional multifaceted inequalities persist. Much 
of the rural population still lacks access to essential services and clean energy. Regional 
development is considered a primary method of achieving NDS objectives. 
5. Despite progress in mainstreaming gender equality in development plans, strategies,
and laws considerable challenges remain. Tajikistan, considering the local context, ranked 
137 out of 153 countries on the 2020 Global Gender Gap Index.
10 Representation in 
decision-making and legislative bodies has somewhat improved since the 2020 elections,
11
but continued efforts are needed to address women’s participation and the gender pay gap. 
Gender roles remain influenced by traditional values. The government places special 
emphasis on implementing relevant measures to raise the status of women in society, 
guarantee their constitutional rights and expand social and labour exposure, address 
demographic problems, promote healthy living, increase levels of education and support 
them in leadership roles. 
6. Tajikistan’s youth12 present a great demographic dividend. One third of young people 
(7.2 per cent men and 49.3 per cent women) have not received education, employment, or 
1 GDP per capita is $863 US dollars.
2 Human Development Report (HDR), UNDP, 2020.
3
 Ibid.
4 Tajikistan Overview: Development news, research, data, World Bank.
5 HDR 2020.
6 Tajikistan Country Briefing, Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, University of Oxford, 2021.
7 Estimated 50 per cent of total employment (Midterm Development Programme (MTDP 2021-2025). 
8 Around 500,000 people annually (85.5 per cent are men from rural areas). Remittances amount to about 29 per cent of GDP. 
9 The agricultural sector employs 70 per cent of the labour force and contributes 25 per cent of GDP. 
10 World Economic Forum, Global Gender Gap Report, 2020.
11 Women occupy 12 of the 64 seats in parliament and chair two of nine parliamentary committees. 
12 Young people under 24 years of age make up 50 per cent of the population.training.
13 Each year about 100,000 young people enter the labor market, but education and 
training systems have not kept pace with labor demand. Addressing cultural and 
socioeconomic issues youth face, and their positive engagement, is considered important 
for maintaining social cohesion in society.
7. Despite past and ongoing reforms, and government efforts to prioritize democratic 
governance, rule of law and protection of human rights challenges remain in performance 
on government effectiveness, regulatory quality, rule of law, people’s participation in 
public life, and anti-corruption.
14 Interested in public administration reform, the
government is taking steps to modernize and digitalize the public sector. Improvements to
the justice sector are requisite for boosting the private sector and improving rights
protections. A law on legal aid was adopted in 2020; however, delivery capacities need 
strengthening and legal awareness amongst the population can be improved. 
8. While Tajikistan remains politically stable, the country faces regional threats of 
violent extremism. Lifting Tajikistan to higher levels of prosperity while maintaining social 
cohesion requires addressing economic, social, environmental and security challenges in a 
coordinated manner. General development trends in the country may be impacted in the 
coming years by the current crisis in Ukraine. 
9. The outbreak of COVID-19 in Tajikistan amplified the country’s multifaceted 
vulnerabilities and weakened the social protection system. The pandemic significantly
stretched the health care system, slowed down the economy15 and weakened the labour 
market. Women and young people face a higher risk of longer-term unemployment, and 
declining remittances16 resulted in lower household consumption. Despite a nine per cent
GDP growth in 2021, the impact of COVID-19—combined with knock-on effects 
associated with the Ukraine crisis—could derail progress towards SDG and NDS targets. 
Moreover, post-COVID-19 economic recovery, including stimulation of small and 
medium-sized businesses, support to vulnerable groups, and implementation of antiepidemic measures all require additional support.
10. The UNDP theory of change mirrors that of the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF): “Improving the living standards of the 
population through sustainable economic development and realizing equal opportunities for 
each person is feasible with investments in quality social services, promotion of the private 
sector to spur green development and job creation, integration of environmental management, 
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation and investments in 
public administration, justice and human rights institutions and gender equality and women’s 
empowerment.” UNDP will continue to strive to achieve connected and measurable change 
under the UNSDCF and will support Tajikistan to secure improved living standards based on 
sustainable economic development and equal opportunities for everyone to realize their
potential based on equality, justice and respect for human dignity.
17
11. The 2020 independent country programme evaluation (ICPE) highlighted that UNDP 
strategically positioned itself as a trusted partner and reliable provider of advisory and 
development services in support of the Tajikistan NDS. UNDP contributed to improving 
governance, rule of law, and access to justice. It actively engaged civil society actors and 
vulnerable groups, and played a catalytic role in improving employment, entrepreneurship,
and trade opportunities. UNDP contributed to climate change mitigation through 
improvements to the legislative, policy and regulatory environment for broader small 
13 Tajikistan Country Gender Assessment, World Bank, 2021. 
14 WGI 2021 Interactive > Interactive Data Access (worldbank.org).
15 Roughly 65 per cent of micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) were affected by the pandemic and almost 25 per cent had to temporarily 
shut down.
16 Remittances declined by 20 per cent in the first quarter of 2020.
17 Tajikistan NDS, Tajikistan in 2030, p. 8.hydropower development and green energy, and better use and management of water 
resources.
12. UNDP will continue to mobilize its cross-sector expertise at national, regional, and 
global levels to ensure continuity and sustainability in assisting the government of 
Tajikistan in close collaboration with United Nations agencies and other development 
partners. Along with the United Nations Department for Economic and Social Affairs
(UNDESA), UNDP will assist the government in strengthening national frameworks for the 
monitoring, reporting, and financing of SDGs, including improved disaggregated data 
collection and research on socioeconomic vulnerabilities.
13. UNDP will fulfil its role as the United Nations technical lead agency for the 
implementation of the COVID-19 socioeconomic recovery plan through a coordinated 
United Nations response aligned with objectives set out in the UNSDCF. UNDP will 
promote integrated solutions by mapping concrete needs, identifying the cause of 
insecurities and their intersections, and establishing comprehensive responses that generate 
positive, context-specific outcomes that benefit communities in need. Tangible and 
sustainable results will make vulnerable populations more resilient, empower the national 
government, and prevent future crises.
14. UNDP programmatic achievements and expansion of interventions is related to its
apolitical position in Tajikistan, and in sticking to the principles of neutrality, impartiality 
and independence while maintaining strategic partnerships with donors and stakeholders, 
and focusing on needs and vulnerabilities in line with advancing the ‘leave no one behind’
principle. Grounded in the ability to leverage, influence, and unlock a broad range of 
resources for development, the UNDP comparative advantage derives from: a) integrating
the SDG agenda through the creation of platforms that allow other United Nations agencies 
and partners to provide policy advice, guidance, and tested practices; b) thought leadership 
and ability to apply data and analytics to connect social, economic and environmental 
analyses; c) ability to combine top-down policy advice with bottom-up solutions; d) 
continued presence and long-term development perspective that allows for the scaling up of 
successful pilots and their integration into policy and legal frameworks; e) ability to bring 
in expertise and international experiences, adopt whole-of-government and whole-ofsociety approaches and promote dialogue and joint problem solving; f) focus on innovation, 
experimentation and supporting acceleration for transformational change, building on 
UNDP accelerator lab experiences; g) expanding field office operations at national and at 
local levels to render local development and the economic transition more inclusive, riskinformed and sustainable.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
15. The CPD was developed in consultation with government and non-government 
stakeholders, donors, development partners, other United Nations agencies, and the Office 
of the Resident Coordinator. Guided by the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025, the UNSDCF 
2023-2026, and outcomes of multistakeholder consultations, UNDP will support Tajikistan 
to advance its development goals, in particular those with the strongest accelerator effect to
the national sustainable development agenda. National authorities confirm the relevance of 
programme priorities towards the achievement of sustainable development results through 
collaborative and joint efforts. 
16. In line with the UNDP Strategic Plan, the CPD will engage the UNDP Global Policy 
Network to support three directions of change: leaving no-one behind, structural 
transformation and building resilience; apply the six signature solutions18 of the UNDP 
18 Energy, poverty and inequality, governance, environment, resilience, and gender equality. Strategic Plan 2022-2025, and promote three enablers of development (strategic innovation, 
digitalization, and development financing). 
17. The new country programme was designed in full alignment with UNSDCF, 
reflecting strategic priorities and cooperation outcomes. UNDP will directly contribute to 
three of the four connected outcomes of UNSDCF: i) sustainable, inclusive, and green
economic growth; ii) integrated management of climate and environmental risk and iii)
people-centred governance and rule of law. 
18. In the role of integrator, connector and innovator, UNDP will ensure provision of 
integrated solutions and platforms in support of a coherent United Nations system approach 
to achieving SDGs services through the ‘Delivering as One’ principle in the spirit of joint 
programming for shared results under the UNSDCF. UNDP will also enhance South-South 
and triangular cooperation through the integration of best practices, knowledge resources, 
success stories and lessons learned from countries in the region and beyond. The ability to 
bring together governments, citizens, private sector, civil society, and other partners at all
levels helps UNDP strengthen partnerships and ensure integrated and multidimensional 
solutions that include pilots that address complex development challenges in Tajikistan. 
This holistic approach underpins its role as “integrator” for Agenda 2030 within the United 
Nations system and complements the UNDP quest for system-wide collaboration under the 
UNSDCF.
Sustainable, inclusive, and green economic growth 
19. Inclusive and green economic growth is a principal driver for promoting low carbon 
development, reducing vulnerability, building resilience of local communities, accelerating 
COVID-19 recovery, and preserving the country’s natural resources for future generations. 
20. UNDP will support government plans to accelerate industrialization and increase 
economic productivity and competitiveness while ensuring that growth is risk-informed, 
inclusive, and aligned with the 2030 Agenda. UNDP will support policies and institutions 
to leverage development financing, enhance a conducive environment for innovative 
entrepreneurship and promote cross-border and international trade. UNDP will promote 
innovation, harness the potential of the digital economy and e-governance, and broker 
novel partnership models such as public-private partnerships. 
21. UNDP plans to accelerate innovations to promote sustainable jobs and livelihoods, 
especially in remote areas where populations face multiple vulnerabilities. Advancing the 
prosperity of rural communities through the use of local resources and development of 
green value chains will help enhance trade and cross-border cooperation. UNDP will 
promote sustainable production and consumption practices, and support the private sector 
in green business development, export promotion, and digitalization of services. 
22. Particular attention will be paid to expanding employment and business opportunities 
for women and young people (especially Not in Education, Employment, or Training
(NEET) group), including access to employable skill development (digital literacy) and 
economic resources. UNDP will work with finance institutions to offer innovative 
financing schemes for business and employment, and that target women, youth, labor 
migrants and other vulnerable groups, such as people affected by crisis. UNDP will work 
with the government and development partners to address structural employment barriers 
for marginalized youth, like the existing skills and job market mismatch, and reduce shares
of informal employment. Also addressed will be the inclusion of people living with 
disabilities, as well as those with limited mobility or access to physical workspaces. 
Integrated management of climate and environmental risk
23. Over the last two years, Tajikistan significantly increased its capacity in climate change 
adaptation (CCA), mitigation, and disaster risk reduction (DRR) to accelerate targets identified in the Sendai Framework19 and Paris Agreement. A more integrated approach to 
addressing CCA is needed that involves environmental and biodiversity management, access 
to clean energy, and greater resilience to disasters and involves local communities and civil 
society organizations. UNDP will work in collaboration with United Nations agencies and 
development partners to support the government in planning and implementing integrated and 
effective measures for at national and local levels. As this requires a vision and strategy for 
risk-informed sustainable economic growth it is links with the first outcome of the CPD.
24. The government considers access to clean and renewable energy a key accelerator 
for achieving NDS objectives and a basic principle for a green economy. UNDP will assist 
the government in promoting energy efficiency and low-emission development in 
economic activities and using technological innovations to support the introduction of 
renewable energy sources. UNDP will also support the design and monitoring of energy 
efficiency standards and incentives for using clean energy sources in households and 
corporate activities. 
25. Tajikistan has an abundance of natural resources. The impact of melting glaciers on 
agriculture and regional water flows is concerning.
20 UNDP will support the government in
developing plans for integrated water resource management, CCA, and adapting innovative 
sustainable and inclusive natural resource management (NRM) measures. UNDP will 
support DRR and increased reforestation in the mountainous areas.
26. UNDP will support the government in improving capabilities to sustainably manage 
ecosystems through conservation management policies. Moreover, UNDP will assist in
assessing climate and disaster risks, setting mitigation and adaptation targets, and providing 
technical inputs to local plans for sustainable NRM. UNDP will assist in addressing waste 
and chemical management issues, as well as recycling in urban areas. In efforts will engage 
women and young people. 
27. In partnership with other United Nations agencies, UNDP will support the 
government in establishing effective monitoring systems at national and local levels to 
track and report on the implementation of international commitments, including the 
preparation and effective implementation of the National Adaptation Plan. UNDP will also 
assist the government in accessing new financing mechanisms for clean and renewable 
energy technologies and low-carbon business development through green bonds, renewable 
energy auctions, and carbon trading.
People-centred governance and rule of law
28. UNDP will continue to support government reform in establishing and maintaining
effective, inclusive and accountable governing institutions for the achievement of NDS 
objectives, SDG 16, and other international human rights obligations. UNDP will help 
promote a transparent, gender-sensitive, and digitalized public administration with innovative 
solutions that can improve the quality and accessibility of public services while developing 
capacities for whole-of-government policy planning and coordination. UNDP will support 
local public administration capacity to improve accessibility to public services with a focus on 
vulnerable and marginalized groups. UNDP will promote rule of law, access to justice, and 
help facilitate people’s meaningful participation—women and youth in particular—in 
decision-making processes to promote equality and social cohesion at the local level. 
29. In partnering with the Academy of Public Administration UNDP will contribute to 
government transparency and accountability efforts21 by supporting public administration 
reform initiatives, promoting the introduction of gender equality in public administration 
19 The National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change until 2030 and the National Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction for 2019-2030 reflect the 
priorities and main directions. 
20 Since 1930, the surface of Tajikistan’s glaciers has retreated by 30 per cent.
21 The MTDP 2020-2025 calls for an analysis of the effectiveness of current anti-corruption legislation. (GEPA) principles, and engaging with civil society and the private sector to innovate
business processes. UNDP will invest in modern capacity development initiatives to create 
an enabling environment for digital innovation in the public sector,
22 and this includes
support to operationalize the Centre for Innovation and Digital Technology. UNDP will 
continue to support effective border management initiatives to help the government 
promote secure and safe borders while remaining open to trade, social interaction, and 
movement across borders. 
30. UNDP will continue to provide support to the justice sector. Assistance will promote 
rule of law principles, including support for upscaling a flagship legal aid initiative to 
ensure it becomes easily accessible for all members of the population. Promoting a rightsbased approach, UNDP will further its support to scaling up the legal identity initiative,
which will advance more equitable access to public services. Working with the Office of 
the Ombudsperson and other United Nations agencies, UNDP will assist in strengthening 
the capacities of government and civil society in implementing Universal Periodic Review
recommendations. Furthermore, UNDP will help develop capacities of the Parliament 
Secretariat, Parliamentary Committees, and legislators to monitor national development 
priorities.
23
III. Programme and risk management
31. UNDP identified the following risks that could hamper programme implementation: 
a) limited resources; b) the impact of a protracted COVID pandemic; c) government 
prioritizing economic reforms with limited commitment to addressing governance and rule 
of law challenges; d) potential threats to social cohesion; e) insufficient data for evidencebased policymaking; f) geopolitical instabilities resulting in trade and economic 
disruptions, and g) the impact of climate change and environmental risks on ecosystems, 
agriculture and livelihoods. 
32. UNDP will diversify its strategic partnerships and donor base, targeting government 
cost-sharing, new development financing from IFIs, European Union, bilateral donors, and 
the private sector, as well as joint resource mobilization with United Nations entities. 
Risks will be managed through coordination, advocacy and policy dialogue, and regular 
monitoring by the CPD Programme Board, as well as through corporate risk management 
tools. 
33. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme. The Harmonized Approach 
to Cash Transfers (HACT), will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United 
Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to concerned projects. 
34. Other national and subnational authorities will act as implementing partners, as 
defined in the results and resources framework (RRF). Principles for programme 
management include joint formulation, implementation, monitoring, and project costsharing, with the use of innovative programming instruments to deliver high-quality results 
while systematically applying UNDP social and environmental safeguards and 
accountability mechanisms. Project boards will be established for each project and projects 
will be designed and implemented in line with UNDP operational guidelines. 
35. This CPD outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary 
unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned 
to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional 
22 The State Program for the Development and Implementation of ICTS, the Concept of the Digital Economy, and of eGovernment have been adopted. 
23 A priority stressed by the President in his address to parliament on 21 December 2021. and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the 
organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out based on RRF outcome and output 
indicators and will be fully inclusive and participatory. Depending on availability, data 
for baselines and targets will be disaggregated by sex, location and population groups, 
with a special focus on vulnerable populations. UNDP will rely on national data systems 
and assist in strengthening national data quality and availability. Data gaps will be 
addressed through support provided to national statistical systems, surveys, and other 
studies. UNDP will advocate for closer alignment of indicators and targets in national and 
sectoral programmes with the SDG monitoring framework. Leveraging joint work with 
relevant institutions and civil society organizations, UNDP will invest in national 
monitoring and evaluation capacities to better capture results of national programmes and 
lessons learned. 
37. Internally, UNDP will increase its monitoring and evaluation capacities by investing 
adequate resources and introducing innovative digital solutions. UNDP will conduct 
annual, joint reviews of project progress and utilize its Local Innovation and 
Implementation Centers to further programme implementation. Monitoring and 
evaluation quality control will be ensured through independent audits and evaluations that 
are conducted in line with UNDP policies and procedures. A comprehensive monitoring 
and evaluation framework will be developed with annual monitoring and risk 
management plans to ensure systematic progress analysis towards the achievement of 
CPD results.DP/DCP/TAJ/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Tajikistan (2023-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS 2030: Rapid industrialization and expanding productive employment.
Midterm Development Programme (MTDP) 2021-2025: digital economy, green economy, gender equality, mobilizing young people. 
(SDG 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 17)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: Outcome 2: Sustainable, inclusive and green economic growth 
By 2026, public institutions and the private sector collaborate to implement innovative and gender-responsive policy frameworks and actions to green the economy and strengthen inclusion of vulnerable 
groups.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
Outcome 2: No one left behind, centering on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines 
targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS /
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST
BY OUTCOME 
(US dollars)
Number of new or amended laws, 
policies, regulations and investments 
approved to promote sustainable and 
green economy development and that 
incorporate gender equity.
considerations 
Baseline: to be determined (TBD)
Targets: TBD
Availability of integrated and SDGaligned national financing framework to 
guide investments.
Baseline: No
Targets: Yes
Availability of a national strategy to 
promote sustainable, green private 
investment and Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) (Yes/No).
Baseline: No
Targets: Yes
Government reports
United Nations/UNDP reports
Annual
NDS, MTDP review
Government reports
United Nations programme 
reports
Annual
TajStat
Government reports
Annual
Output 1.1.: Policies, Laws and Budgets
accelerate people-centred and risk informed 
economic transformation aligned with Agenda 
2030 
Indicator 1.1.1.: Extent to which national and local 
development plans/budgets integrate Agenda 2030 
and other inter-governmental frameworks.
Baseline 2021: Integration in progress (78%) 
Target 2026: Integrated at all levels 
Source: Government and United Nations reports 
Indicator 1.1.2.: Number of institutions that have 
mainstreamed actions for green economy and 
responsible production into their policies and
implementation schemes.
Baseline 2021: 2 government institutions
Target 2026: 4 government institutions and 20 
private sector enterprises
Source: Government and United Nations reports 
Indicator 1.1.3.: Number of policies, regulations, 
and partnerships to promote favourable investment 
and business climate with focus on digital solutions.
Baseline 2021: 4 
Target 2026: 5
Source: Government and United Nations reports 
Executive Office of the President (EOP)
National Development Council (NDC)
Ministry of Economic Development and Trade 
(MEDT)
State Committee on Investments and State 
Property Management (SCISPM)
Ministry of Labour, Migration and
Employment (MLME)
Ministry of Justice (MoJ)
Ministry of Industry &New Technologies 
(MINT)
National Bank 
Statistic Agency
Committee on Tourism 
Ministry of Finance (MoF)
Tax Committee 
Committee on Women and Family Affairs 
(CWFA)
Committee on Youth and Sport (CYS)
Parliament 
Regional and local authorities
Development partners and United Nations
agencies
International Financial Institutions (IFIs) 
Regular: $3.6 million
Other: $38.6 millionNumber of policy measures adopted to 
promote export industries.
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Output 1.2.: Innovative solutions are scaled up 
for green and inclusive value chains and 
enhanced trade and cross-border economic 
cooperation to promote sustainable livelihoods 
and jobs. 
Indicator 1.2.1.: Number of innovative solutions 
adopted by programme partners to enhance job-rich 
and livelihood- intensive productive capacities.
Baseline 2021: 10 
Target 2026: 15
Source: Government and United Nations reports 
Indicator 1.2.2.: Number of public and private 
sector institutions with strengthened capacities for 
production and export of high value-added 
products.
Baseline 2021: 62 MSMEs and five public 
institutions
Target 2026: 200 MSMEs and 10 public institutions
Source: Government and UNDP/United Nations
reports
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and 
Business Support Organizations 
Private Sector
Proportion of informal employment in 
total employment, by sector and sex.
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Proportion of youth (aged 15–24 years) 
not in education, employment or training 
(NEET), by sex 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Labour force participation rates, by sex, 
age 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Output 1.3.: People, especially women, youth 
and other vulnerable populations, have access to 
knowledge, skills and assets to enhance their 
employment opportunities.
Indicator 1.3.1.: Number of people having access to 
improved services for employment, sexdisaggregated.
Baseline (2021): 2,200, 40% women, 50% youth 
Target (2026): 6,000, 40% women, 60 % youth 
Source: Government and United Nations reports 
Indicator 1.3.2.: Number of people benefitting from 
jobs and improved livelihoods, disaggregated by 
sex and age.
Baseline 2021: 13,675 (35% women)
Target 2026: 40,000 (40% women, 65% youth, 100 
people living with disabilities 
Source: Government and United Nations reports
Indicator 1.3.3: Number of country-led measures to 
advance economic empowerment of women.
Baseline 2021: 2
Target 2026: 10
Source: Government and United Nations reports DP/DCP/TAJ/3
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS 2030: Energy security. 
MTDP 2021-2025: The environment, climate change and disaster risk management, integrated water resource management.
(SDG 6, 13, 15)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: Outcome 3: Integrated management of climate and environmental risk.
By 2026, natural resources management is inclusive and sustainable with integrated policy frameworks and actions to enhance climate-change and livelihoods of vulnerable groups.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions.
Outcome 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
Proportion of important sites for 
terrestrial and freshwater biodiversity 
that are covered by protected areas, by 
ecosystem type.
Baseline: TBD
Targets: TBD
Government Reports 
United Nations/UNDP reports
Annual
NBBC
TajStat
United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP)
Output 2.1.: Sustainable management of 
ecosystems enhanced through conservation 
management policies and action on 
environmentally sound waste management.
Indicator 2.1.1.: Number of protected areas and 
ecosystems under sustainable management and 
conservation.
Baseline (2016): 20 (3.1 million ha)
Target (2026): 22 (3.15 million ha)
Source: Government reports
Indicator 2.1.2.: Extent to which Ozone Depleting 
Substance (ODS) is phased out in line with 
international law and standards.
Baseline (1998): 341 Metric Ton ODS
Target (2026): Complete phase down
Source: Government
NDC
Ministry of Energy and Water Resources 
(MEWR)
Committee for Environmental Protection 
(CoEP)
Committee for Emergency Situations and 
Civil Defense (CoES)
Agency for Land Reclamation and Irrigation 
(ALRI)
MoA
Ministry of Transport (MoT)
Ministry of Health and Social Protection of 
the Population (MHSPP)
National Biodiversity and Biosafety Center 
under CoEP (NBBC)
CWFA
MEDT
MoF
SCISPM
MLME
Regional and local authorities
United Nations agencies
IFIs 
CSOs and Business Support Organizations 
Private sector
Regular: $3.6 million
Other: $35.2 million 
Proportion of District Development 
Plans (DDPs) incorporating sustainable 
and inclusive natural resources 
management and climate change 
adaptation (CCA).
Baseline: TBD
Targets: TBD
No. of people benefitting from DDPs 
and other community based integrated 
solutions for sustainable and inclusive 
natural resource management, CCA and 
DRR.
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Degree of integrated water resources 
management.
Baseline: 46 (0-100) (2020)
Government Reports 
United Nations/UNDP reports
Annual
CoES 
TajStat
ALRI 
MoA
NBBC
UNEP
Output 2.2: Innovative, sustainable and inclusive 
NRM, IWRM (integrated water resource 
management), climate change adaptation (CCA) 
and disaster risk reduction (DRR) solutions 
designed and implemented 
Indicator 2.2.1.: Number of 
sectoral/regional/national gender responsive NRM, 
IWRM, CCA and DRR initiatives implemented.
Baseline (2018): 4
Target (2026): 14 
Source: Government reports 
Indicator 2.2.2.: Number of people directly 
benefitting from initiatives to protect nature and 
promote sustainable use of resources.
Baseline (2018): 31,131 
Target (2026): 87,945 (30% women)
Source: Government and UNDP reportsTarget:
Number of new or amended strategies, 
national plans contributing to the 
implementation of NDCs and National 
CCA Strategy.
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Government Reports
TajStat
United Nations/UNDP reports
Annual
United Nations Office for 
Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNIDRR)
MEWR
CoEP
CoES
ALRI
MoA
Output 2.3.: Institutions have strengthened 
capacities to develop, manage and deliver 
policies, strategies, and actions for climate 
resilient, disaster responsive and green/low 
carbon development.
Indicator 2.3.1.: Number of policies, strategies, 
plans, regulations and mechanisms developed to 
promote climate and disaster resilient, riskinformed and green/low carbon development.
Baseline (2018): 4
Target (2026): 14
Source: Government reports 
Indicator 2.3.2.: Number of institutions with 
strengthened capacities on climate resilience, 
disaster response and green/low carbon 
development.
Baseline (2018): 4
Target (2026): 5
Source: Government reports 
Government Reports 
United Nations/UNDP reports
Annual
NDC
MEWR
MEDT
CoEP
Private sector 
Output 2.4.: Solutions developed, financed and 
applied at scale for structural transformation of 
the energy sector and promotion of renewable 
energy.
Indicator 2.4.1.: Extent to which Tajikistan has 
policy measures in place to enable the enhancement 
and/or implementation of Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDC) under the Paris Agreement.
(Rating scale: 0 = Not in place, 1 = Work started, 2 
= Work in progress, 3 = Work almost complete, 4 = 
In place)
Baseline (2015): 1
Target (2025): 4 
Source: NDC and national communication 
Indicator 2.4.2.: Installed new capacity from 
renewable energy (RE) production.
Baseline (1990): 25.52 million tCO2eqDP/DCP/TAJ/3
Target (2026): 0.750 MW increase in installed RE 
capacity, and lifetime RE production of 59,130 
MWh from RE sources.
Source: Government and UNDP reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS 2030: Stronger national institutions.
MDP 2020-2025: public administration system, rule of law and access to justice, gender equality, fight against corruption.
(SDG 5, 16)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: Outcome 4: People-centered governance and rule of law. 
By 2026, governance is more inclusive, transparent and accountable, serving to protect human rights, empower women, and reduce violence and discrimination in alignment with the international 
commitments of Tajikistan.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 
Outcome 2: No one left behind, centering on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development.
Outcome 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk.
Primary government expenditures as a 
proportion of original approved budget, 
by sector.
Baseline: TBD
Targets: TBD
Availability of approved legal 
frameworks to promote, enforce and 
monitor equality and non-discrimination 
on the basis of sex. (Yes/No)
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Government reports
United nations/UNDP reports
Biannually
Output 3.1.: Institutions at national and local 
levels have improved capacities and use 
innovative solutions to provide accessible, 
quality public services to the people and 
economic actors.
Indicator 3.1.1.: % of people satisfied with public 
services, sex-disaggregated.
Baseline 2021: 63%
Target 2026: 75%
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Indicator 3.1.2.: Number of institutions providing
services and new business processes.
Baseline 2021: 1
Target 2026: 2
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Indicator 3.1.3.: Number of people (a) benefiting 
from HIV anti-retroviral and (b) Multidrug- and 
rifampicin-resistant tuberculosis (, MDR/RR-TB) 
notified, sex-disaggregated.
Baseline 2021:
(a) 8,740 (44% women)
(b) 613 (44% women)
Target 2023:
(a) 11,305 (45% women)
(b) 1,200 (45% women)
EOP 
Parliament 
Supreme Court and regional courts
MoJ
State Agency for Legal Aid Center (SALAC)
Statistic Agency (under EOP)
CWFA 
MHSPP
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Tajik Border Force (State Committee for 
National Security)
Customs Service 
Drug Control Agency
MEDT 
Regional and local authorities
Development partners and United Nations
agencies
IFIs 
CSOs and Business Support Organizations 
Private sector 
Regular: $3.6 million
Other: $60.2 million Source: Government, sub-recipients, UNDP reports 
Indicator 3.1.4.: Number of cross-border, national, 
sub-national entities and community-based 
organizations with strengthened capacities for:
a) improved service delivery on integrated 
border management 
b) conflict prevention and peacebuilding
c) social cohesion
Baseline 2021: 
a) 3
b) 0
c) 0
Target 2026: 
a) 5
b) 4
c) 8
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Extent to which the Tajik Ombudsman 
Office (NHRI) is in compliance with 
Paris Principles. 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Proportion of population: a) Satisfied 
with their last experience on Free Legal 
Aid; and b) Satisfied with their 
experience of Civil Registration services.
Baseline a): TBD
Targets a): TBD
Baseline b): TBD
Targets b): TBD
Proportion of ever-partnered women and 
girls aged 15 years and older subjected 
to physical, sexual or psychological 
violence by a current or former intimate 
partner in the previous 12 months, data 
disaggregated by form of violence and 
age.
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Government Reports
UNDP reports 
TajStat
Output 3.2.: Governance institutions at national 
and local levels have strengthened capacities and 
systems in place to support access to justice and 
remove structural barriers to gender equality 
and women’s empowerment. 
Indicator 3.2.1.: Number of people supported who 
have access to justice.
Baseline 2021: 9,461 (62% women) 
Target 2026: 45,376 (61% women) 
Source: Legal Aid Case Management System 
Indicator 3.2.2.: Number of people covered by 
digitalized civil registration sex-disaggregated.
Baseline 2021: 432,767 
Target 2026: 1.7million (49% women)
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Indicator 3.2.3.: Number of legal and policy 
initiatives developed to advance gender equality 
and women’s empowerment and reduce genderbased violence.
Baseline 2021: 2 
Target 2026: 4
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Indicator 3.2.4.: Extent to which Tajikistan's 
institutions, systems and stakeholders have DP/DCP/TAJ/3
capacities to support fulfilment of nationally and 
internationally ratified human rights obligations.
(rating scale: 0 = Not in place, 1 = Capacity low, 2 
= Capacity neither low nor high, 3 = Capacity high, 
4 = Capacity very high)
Baseline 2021: 1
Target 2026: 3
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Output 3.3.: Governance institutions and 
processes are made more transparent, and 
accountable and use technological innovations to 
engage the larger society in participatory policy 
formulation, planning, implementation and 
oversight.
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of civil servants (sexdisaggregated) that have improved capacity for 
participatory planning and budgeting of local 
development.
Baseline 2021: 230 (78% women)
Target 2026: 900 (80% women) 
Source: Government and UNDP reports 
Indicator 3.3.2.: Number of members of parliament 
with enhanced capacities to advance the work of 
parliamentary committees for law-making, 
oversight and policy analysis.
Baseline 2021: 0
Target 2026: 63
Source: Government and UNDP reports
Indicator 3.3.3.: Number of institutions with new 
modus operandi and digital solutions introduced to 
improve transparency in public management and 
service delivery. 
Baseline 2021: 2
Target 2026: 8
Source: Government and UNDP reports
_________________