File Name: TKM-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Turkmenistan
Country Code: TKM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2020
Original: English
2008920X (E) 280720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Turkmenistan (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management …………………………………………………….…………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Turkmenistan (2021-2025) ………………………………… 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework
1. Turkmenistan is an upper-middle-income country of over 6.2 million people1. Its 
developing market economy is largely dependent on oil and gas, accounting for 77.8 per cent 
of total exports and 22.2 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP)
2
in 2018. The human 
development index value for Turkmenistan was 0.710 in 2018, ranking it 108th out of 
189 countries in the ‘high human development’ category3. 
2. The Government has converted its hydrocarbon wealth into large-scale public investment 
in infrastructure and social services, nearly doubling its per capita gross national income 
between 1990 and 20164. From 2014, economic shocks – including the lower-for-longer oil 
and gas prices and increasing greenhouse gas emissions – demonstrated the need for more 
sustainable and inclusive economic diversification covering all aspects of socio-economic 
development and reaching the most vulnerable groups, including low-income households and 
those headed by women and younger people, women and men with special needs, the 
unemployed – especially youth – smallholder farmers, and people living with chronic 
diseases. 
3. The National Programme for Socio-Economic Development, 2011-20305, which aims to 
accelerate growth with stronger institutions and policies, increased synergy between the 
public and private sectors, greater use of technology, and integration into the global economy, 
was complemented by Presidential Programme for Socio-Economic Development of 
Turkmenistan, 2019-2025. That programme constitutes a strategic framework focused on 
market reforms, delivery of the Sustainable Development Goals, economic diversification, 
and investment in human capital6.
4. Turkmenistan is committed to the Goals, which it nationalized in 2016. Its Voluntary 
National Review reports progress toward nationalized targets for social policy, market 
transformation, and climate change adaptation and mitigation. Large-scale investments in 
physical infrastructure continue, and investment is made in human capital and institutions. 
5. The commitment of Turkmenistan to the Goals has shaped the priorities of the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025. As the 
largest United Nations organization on the ground, UNDP has played a central role in the 
resident coordinator-led process of defining United Nations cooperation priorities. 
6. This country programme derives directly from the Framework and builds upon UNDP 
comparative advantages, together with lessons learned and recommendations from 
cooperation to date. 
7. The independent country programme evaluation highlights the UNDP position as a trusted 
strategic partner and appreciates its integrator function across the United Nations 
development system7. Comparative advantages are: (a) reputation and positioning;
(b) impartiality; (c) technical expertise to support multi-sector strategic frameworks, 
(d) strong and agile operational presence, and (e) provision of integrated, cross-sectoral 
solutions, combining policy and regulatory advice with capacity development. 
8. These were demonstrated in current programme results, including: (a) closer alignment of 
national and sectoral programmes with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and 
1 United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025, p.1. 
2
State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan, Statistical Yearbook, 2018
3 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2019. 
4
State Statistics Committee of Turkmenistan, 2019.
5 Based on the review of the national programme of Turkmenistan on socio-economic development for 2011-2030 carried out by UNICEF (2012)
 and the country engagement note of the World Bank, fiscal year 2016-2017
6
Presidential Programme for Socio-economic Development, 2019-2025.
7 UNDP independent country programme evaluation: Turkmenistan
April 2020the Sustainable Development Goals; (b) stronger institutional capacities to implement 
international human rights commitments; (c) enhanced health-system response to 
tuberculosis and other infectious diseases; and (d) development of new laws and regulations 
for climate change adaptation and mitigation and sustainable energy solutions. UNDP 
worked with other United Nations organizations to develop joint strategies and programmes 
for disaster risk reduction and social service delivery8.
9. To address the programmatic recommendations of the independent country programme 
evaluation, UNDP should scale up system-level changes by strengthening interconnections 
among programme priorities, and avoid fragmentation of interventions. Despite progress on 
promoting the human rights agenda, UNDP needs to step up its programmatic response –
including support to the Government in meeting relevant treaty body recommendations – in 
partnership with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR). UNDP needs to expand its focus on persons with disabilities, social service 
provision, and women’s empowerment, applying a rights-based approach.
10. Its comparative advantages – especially established presence, trustworthy relations with 
the Government, global expertise and knowledge – uniquely position UNDP as the lead 
development partner of the Government in addressing three major challenges identified in 
the Cooperation Framework:
(a) Guided by the relevant Strategic Plan outcomes and signature solutions, UNDP will 
continue to support people-centred governance based on the ‘leave no one behind’ 
principle, focused on strengthening rule of law, regulatory quality, government 
effectiveness, and voice and accountability, with an overarching commitment to 
addressing human rights-related issues, vulnerability and marginalization. 
(b) Building on its innovation expertise, Global Policy Network and South-South and 
triangular cooperation experience, UNDP will support sustainable economic 
diversification driven by greater resilience to disasters, nature-based solutions, and 
sustainable energy and natural resources management, leading to improved livelihoods, 
greater employment opportunities, private sector development, and enhanced valuechain and trade mechanisms. UNDP will support the introduction of banking and 
financial instruments that will engage new economic segments and foster 
entrepreneurship, prioritizing women-headed enterprises. 
(c) UNDP will continue to promote inclusive prosperity focused on improving health 
and well-being and social support systems. Special attention will be paid to structural 
issues to accelerate progress and reduce exclusion risks for vulnerable groups.
11. By April 2020, Turkmenistan reported no cases of COVID-19. However, the impact of 
the global pandemic on its socio-economic situation is evident in the lockdown of borders 
and passenger/cargo routes, and export/import challenges. Capitalizing on its global 
integrated response to COVID-19, UNDP is one of the few development organizations on 
the ground helping Turkmenistan prepare for, respond to and recover from the pandemic, 
focusing particularly on the most vulnerable.
12. The UNDP integrator role is thus vital to ensuring that its wide development agenda, 
including implementation of Sustainable Development Goals, effectively includes traditional 
and non-traditional development partners across the United Nations development system 
(including OHCHR, the United Nations Environment Programme – UNEP, the United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development – UNCTAD, the Food and Agriculture 
Organization – FAO, the Economic Commission for Europe, the Economic and Social 
Commission for Asia and the Pacific, the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 
and UN-Women), international financial institutions, bilateral actors, the private sector and 
civil society. UNDP is well positioned to roll out a platform on strategic interaction with 
8 UNDP
independent country programme evaluation: TurkmenistanApril 2020pp21-22international financial institutions and private investors to ensure a holistic approach to 
financing the Sustainable Development Goals.
13. With regard achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, the UNDP integrator offer
is particularly valuable in (a) facilitating global expertise through South-South and triangular 
cooperation and wide stakeholder engagement, including international financial institutions, 
to make the economic growth model more inclusive and sustainable; (b) strengthening
Government engagement with civil society, the private sector and other development 
partners; (c) advocacy and innovative financing, through which UNDP can support a 
United Nations system response to strengthen the social protection system and scale up 
proven service delivery pilots for vulnerable groups; (d) increased engagement of 
Turkmenistan with human rights bodies and mechanisms, enabling UNDP to support 
implementation of accepted recommendations and advocate for the tangible inclusion of 
human rights commitments – especially for gender equality and women’s empowerment – in 
policies and programmes, together with OHCHR and other United Nations organizations; 
and (e) building on efforts to promote understanding of climate change to advocate, with the 
Government and other partners, to create climate-smart, disaster-resilient and sustainable 
energy solutions, bringing in expertise from UNEP, FAO and other relevant bodies.
14. To increase its effectiveness in building human and institutional capacities, UNDP will 
(a) adopt a broader partnership approach, with a focus on capacity-building of civil society 
and working with the Government to scale up successful pilot initiatives and sustain 
programme results, and (b) strengthen government capacities for stronger inter-ministry and 
cross-sector collaboration, forging links between sectoral policy and programme priorities 
and nationalized Sustainable Development Goals targets.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
15. The country programme derives directly from the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025, and was developed in partnership with 
the Government of Turkmenistan, in consultation with the private sector and civil society. 
16. The programme vision supports the people-centered priorities of the state, with 
accelerated economic diversification and growth, linked with the sustainable 
management of natural wealth and use of green technologies. UNDP will exercise its 
integrator role to deliver the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda as the 
backbone for ensuring benefits for people across the programme scope. Aligning with the 
Cooperation Framework and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, four interconnected 
priorities reinforce one another and maintain the indivisibility of the development agenda for 
sustainable change.
17. Under priority 1, guided by its global signature solution on governance and building on 
its comparative advantage and proven track record, UNDP will support implementation of 
practical reforms for more effective, transparent and digital public administration, based on 
international standards and the commitments of Turkmenistan to rule of law, human rights 
and gender equality. Special attention is paid to improving e-government systems and digital 
public services. Vulnerable groups expected to benefit from cooperation are low-income 
households and those headed by women and younger people, victims of domestic violence, 
people with special needs, unemployed and underemployed youth, remote, rural 
communities, migrants, refugees and stateless persons. UNDP will explore opportunities 
under South-South and triangular cooperation to ensure exchange of the most relevant 
expertise across the Central Asia region and beyond.
18. Programme cooperation will address three conditions necessary for success: 
(a) UNDP will work with the Government to strengthen policies, institutions and 
financing mechanisms to implement Sustainable Development Goals targets. Civil 
servants will have new capacities to collect and analyse disaggregated data and create a stronger evidence base for policies and programmes incorporating the Sustainable 
Development Goals.
(b) UNDP will partner with state institutions, including Parliament, the Institute of State, 
Law and Democracy, the Ministry of Justice, law enforcement agencies, and the 
Ombudsperson’s Office, bringing in OHCHR capacities to implement recommendations 
from human rights treaty bodies and mechanisms as part of national human rights action 
plans, and will support a stronger legal and policy environment for civil society 
organizations. UNDP will collaborate with the European Union to ensure synergy of 
efforts in supporting the implementation of the human rights agenda deriving from its 
regional strategy for Central Asia.
(c) New e-government platforms and digital technology services will be supported to offer
citizens, civil society, and businesses alternative channels to obtain high-quality services 
and gather and respond to citizen input.
19. Under priority 2, contributing to the UNDP signature solutions for keeping people out 
of poverty and strengthening gender equality, along with the global integrated offer for 
mitigating the socio-economic consequences of COVID-19, UNDP will support the design 
and implementation of policy and regulatory reforms to promote economic development and 
better livelihoods in the non-hydrocarbon sectors; increased private sector competitiveness 
and trade; innovative and effective banking; and creation of decent jobs. Sustainable 
Development Goals financing and financing for development will serve as key principles for 
ensuring sustainable and balanced economic growth. UNDP will promote the ‘recovering 
better’ principle, ensuring that the benefits of growth are widely and fairly shared, especially 
with women and vulnerable groups, including low income households and those headed by 
women and younger people, the unemployed and informal sector workers, persons with 
disabilities and smallholder farmers. To ensure a holistic approach to delivering this priority, 
UNDP will partner with UNCTAD and initiate synergies with international financial 
institutions, such as the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Asian 
Development Bank and the Islamic Development Bank.
20. Based on the theory of change, the programme will support four conditions for success: 
(a) UNDP will work with the Government and the private sector in strengthening
regulatory and institutional frameworks to enhance the business environment and trade 
capacity, and to promote digitalization. 
(b) Economic recovery and diversification require space for the expansion of small and 
medium-sized enterprises. UNDP will support the Government in implementing
regulatory changes to enable entrepreneurs, especially women, to start and invest in 
businesses and promote entrepreneurship training and services. Low-carbon growth, agribusiness and rural value chains will be at the centre, ensuring intersections with priority 3,
on climate change adaptation. 
(c) Achievement of national programmes and Sustainable Development Goals will require 
a shift towards more rigorous financing, ‘green’ economy development, and greater 
investment in sustainable consumption and production. UNDP will support innovative 
banking and financial instruments to incentivize a green economy. New, more efficient 
green technologies in agriculture and agribusiness growth will contribute to improved 
resource management and strengthened rural livelihoods.
(d) Economic recovery and diversification efforts must ensure growth with equity. UNDP 
will advocate for gender equality measures, including pay equity, the hiring and 
promotion of women, women’s entrepreneurship, and legal guarantees of women’s rights 
to economic resources.
21. Under priority 3, in line with the UNDP global signature solutions on promoting naturebased solutions and crisis prevention for development, UNDP will support the Government 
and other partners in implementing effective measures for climate adaptation and mitigation, 
natural resources management, and disaster risk reduction. Expected results will strengthen ecosystem health, increase community resilience, promote energy efficiency and support 
policy and regulatory efforts to make the transition to green and low-emission development. 
Results are expected to increase community and household resilience, especially of 
vulnerable groups such as: low income households and those headed by women and younger 
people; rural households and smallholder farmers; the unemployed; and informal sector 
workers, especially women, young people and persons with disabilities. To deliver this 
priority, UNDP will partner with the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, 
UNEP, FAO, and other United Nations organizations and stakeholders.
22. Programme cooperation will address four conditions for success: 
(a) UNDP will work with the Government to strengthen the policy and regulatory 
framework for climate change adaptation and mitigation, disaster risk reduction, and 
sustainable energy. UNDP will support a monitoring system to track the implementation 
of climate change actions under the National Strategy on Climate Change, and climate 
financing will be expanded to implement Sustainable Development Goal 13, the Paris 
Climate Agreement, and other multilateral environmental agreements.
(b) UNDP will support robust, coordinated strategies and systems for sustainable 
management of land, water, ecosystem and other natural resources, green urban 
development, energy efficiency, and disaster risk reduction, preparedness and response, 
with a focus on high-risk areas and communities. In line with international commitments, 
this entails capacity development for analysis of climate and disaster risks, local-level 
preparedness, tangible mitigation and adaptation targets, and sustainable natural resources
management.
(c) UNDP will support the Government, the private sector, farmers’ associations, 
communities and civil society organizations to adopt effective management practices and 
knowledge transfer for climate-resilient use of arable land and water, contributing to 
priority 2, on economic diversification.
(d) UNDP will help the Government promote energy efficiency through a strategic plan 
for low-emission development and the use of renewables, including designing and 
implementing energy efficiency standards and practices and new energy efficiency
incentives for households and industry. 
23. Under priority 4, building on the UNDP global signature solutions for keeping people 
out of poverty and strengthening resilience and gender equality, UNDP will bolster health 
and social protection systems to deliver higher-quality, more inclusive services, focused on 
controlling tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, pandemic prevention and response 
capacities, improved management of non-communicable diseases, and increased coverage of 
social protection for vulnerable groups (low-income households and those headed by women 
and younger people, persons with disabilities, and the unemployed, including young persons, 
and prisoners). UNDP will partner with the World Health Organization, the Global Fund, and 
other stakeholders. 
24. Programme cooperation will support four necessary conditions for success: 
(a) UNDP will work with the ministries of health and internal affairs to strengthen 
standards, guidelines, and outreach for the effective treatment of multi-drug-resistant 
tuberculosis and other infectious diseases, and pandemic prevention and preparedness. 
(b) UNDP will support the health system to better manage non-communicable diseases
with evidence-based standards and guidelines through a primary-care approach, enhanced 
training and supervisory systems. In its integrator role, UNDP will support the health 
system to better understand and respond to co-morbidities related to non-communicable 
diseases, air pollution, climate and health.
(c) UNDP will work with the Ministry of Labour and Social Protection and civil society 
organizations to transform social service delivery, including expanding the effectiveness 
of social protection and local-level spending. UNDP will support increased participation of civil society organizations in social service provision, and outreach to vulnerable 
groups will involve community-based pilots that can be taken to scale. 
(d) Improved statistics are essential to enhancing the targeting and management of health 
and social protection programmes and spending. Under United Nations system 
cooperation, UNDP will support the ministries of health, labour and social protection, 
finance, and economy, in using disaggregated data to inform budgeting and service 
provision, with a focus on vulnerable groups.
25. Guided by the UNDP gender equality strategy, gender norms and practices will be 
examined across all priorities, and UNDP will advocate with the Government to address gaps 
in legislative and institutional frameworks on its international gender-equality commitments 
to facilitate stronger women’s roles in leadership, policymaking, and socio-economic 
processes, focusing on women’s economic empowerment and entrepreneurship.
III. Programme and risk management 
26. Major internal risks for programme cooperation are: (a) availability of resources for 
implementing country programme priorities; (b) conventional bureaucracy affecting 
implementation timelines; (c) insufficient capacities for civil society engagement; and (d) the 
COVID-19 pandemic and response, which are straining households, health systems and the 
national economy. Other external risks include (a) declining oil and gas prices, which may 
diminish government revenues; (b) increased geo-political and trade instability, which may 
have negative impacts on business sentiment, foreign direct investment, and revenue 
generation; and (c) disaster risks (such as earthquakes, floods, droughts and hazardous 
weather conditions) and the potential for increased social vulnerability, aggravated by climate 
change.
27. UNDP will prepare a risk-management plan, including application of the social and 
environmental standards, the accountability mechanism and regular risk assessments. To
mitigate internal risks, UNDP will strive to broaden its donor base beyond government costsharing and vertical funds, engaging with international financial institutions, the European 
Union and bilateral donors where possible. UNDP will continue regular engagement with the 
Government and tap into established relationships to facilitate effective resolution of any 
emerging issues, including strengthening the capacities of civil society organizations.
28. To address the COVID-19 pandemic, UNDP, guided by its global integrated offer, 
provides technical leadership to United Nations socio-economic mitigation efforts, with 
coordination by the Resident Coordinator, to address subsequent risks, including the negative 
impact on the economy of falling oil and gas prices. UNDP includes disaster risk management 
support in the country programme as part of the resident coordinator-led United Nations
effort to support national contingency planning and emergency response capacities.
29. The programme will be nationally executed under the coordination of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs. Other national and subnational authorities will act as implementing partners, 
as defined in the results and resources framework. Principles for programme management 
include joint formulation, implementation, monitoring, and cost-sharing of projects, with the 
rigorous use of innovative programming instruments to deliver high-quality results. Project 
boards will be established for each project, and projects will be designed and implemented in 
line with social and environmental safeguards. UNDP will continue to provide 
implementation support services at the request of the Government. 
30. UNDP will develop its partnerships and resource mobilization strategy. Allocation of 
UNDP regular resources to implement this country programme will be defined in accordance 
with the relevant Executive Board decisions9. Additional sources of finance will be identified, 
including blended finance and other flows for Sustainable Development Goals-related 
country priorities, and resources from private sector and other partners. Efforts will be made 
9 As of May 2020 (DP/2013/45)to increase government cost-sharing towards UNDP programme and institutional costs. 
Should the expected resource envelope not be met, UNDP and the Government will revise 
the targets.
31. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed 
in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control Framework.
32. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. Monitoring and evaluation will be carried out on the basis of the Results and Resources 
Framework outcome and output indicators, aligned with the nationalized Sustainable 
Development Goals indicator framework. This demonstrates the connection between the 
support provided by UNDP and sustainable development results. As far as possible, data for 
baselines and targets will be disaggregated by sex, area, income, and sub-population groups, 
especially vulnerable groups. Data gaps will be addressed through support to national 
statistical systems, surveys, and other studies identified as a part of cooperation.
34. UNDP will advocate for closer alignment of indicators and targets in national and sectoral 
programmes with the Sustainable Development Goals monitoring framework. Within overall 
Cooperation Framework monitoring and reporting, UNDP will support the Government in
tracking changes to nationalized indicators and targets. 
35. In collaboration with the Government and other partners, UNDP will develop a 
systematic, multi-year policy research and knowledge management agenda to inform 
implementation, monitoring, and reporting. UNDP will promote government leadership and 
strengthen the capacities of implementing partners. This will help meet the demand for 
information about programme performance and use it to learn, manage, and adjust strategy 
and resources for greater impact. UNDP will employ the gender marker to monitor the share 
of country programme expenditures directed towards gender equality and women’s 
empowerment, and will improve planning and decision-making. An independent evaluation 
of the country programme will be conducted in 2024. Annex. Results and resources framework for Turkmenistan (2021-2025)
National priority or goal: Ensure high-level human capital development as a result of improvement of quality of social services 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSCDF) (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #1. By 2025, people have access to more effective, innovative, and 
transparent public administration based upon the rule of law, human and labour rights, gender equality and quality data 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 2. Accelerating structural transformations for sustainable development
UNSCDF outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source, frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Major partners/ 
partnerships and
frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome
(in $ thousands)
1. Indicator 1.3: Percentage of 
nationalized SDG Indicators that have 
disaggregated data (where relevant) 
available to report (SDG 17.18.1)
Baseline: 50% (2019) 
Target: To be defined
Data source: Government SDG indicator 
matrix
Sources: Ministry of Finance and 
Economy (MFE) 
State Statistics Committee (SSC)
Frequency: Periodic
Output 1.1. Policies, institutional, and financing 
mechanisms strengthened for implementation, 
measurement, and monitoring of nationalized SDG 
indicators and targets 
Indicator 1.1.1. Extent to which national and 
sectoral development plans reflect 17 SDGs 
Baseline: 85% alignment (2020)
Target: 95% alignment (2025)
Data source: Rapid integrated assessment reports
Indicator 1.1.2. Programme budgets introduced and 
aligned with SDG financing needs 
Baseline: None (2020)
Target: Budgets in 5 government agencies (2025)
Data source: Government reports; project reports
Indicator 1.1.3. Availability of integrated SDG 
database
Baseline: No (2020)
Target: Yes (2025)
Data source: Government reports; project reports
Output 1.2. State institutions have improved public 
administration system with electronic government 
systems and digital public services for the population,
with special focus on services for vulnerable groups. 
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of state institutions with 
integrated digital business processes and/or digital 
public services
Baseline: To be identified 
Target: At least 5 additional state institutions 
(2025)
Parliament
MFE
Ministry of Justice
(MOJ)
State Agency for 
Communication (SAC)
SSC
State Customs Service
(SCS)
Pension fund under 
Ministry of Labour and 
Social Protection
(MLSP)
State Insurance 
Organization (SIO)
Commercial banks;
Law enforcement 
agencies
Institute of State, Law 
and Democracy (ISLD)
Ombudsman’s Office
Civil society 
organizations (CSOs)
Regular: 370
Other: 5,000Data source: Project reports, national partner 
reports
Indicator 1.2.2. Number of women and men 
participating in capacity-building activities for 
public administration and digitalization 
Baseline: 0 
Target: At least 600 (at least 30% women) (2025)
Data source: Project reports, national partner 
reports
2. Indicator 1.1. Extent to which legal 
frameworks address human and labour 
rights, including gender equality and 
non‑discrimination on the basis of age, 
sex, disability, ethnicity, religion, 
political opinion, economic, or other 
status (SDG 5.1.1) 
(Rating 4-point scale: 4. Fully; 3. 
Partially; 2. Inadequately; 1. Not/poorly)
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 4 (2025)
Source: Parliament
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: age, sex, disability
Output 1.3. Legislation, policies, programmes and their 
implementation are strengthened to address
recommendations from United Nations human rights 
mechanisms, including the Universal Periodic Review, 
treaty bodies, and special procedures, with civil society
participation 
Indicator 1.3.1. Second National Human Rights 
Action Plan (NHRAP) developed and endorsed 
Baseline: No
Target: Yes
Data source: NHRAP assessment report 
Indicator 1.3.2. Proportion of accepted 
United Nations treaty body recommendations 
implemented under National Human Rights Action 
Plan, 2021-2024 
Baseline: 70% (First NHRAP, 2016-2020) 
Target: 80% (Second NHRAP) 
Data source: NHRAP assessment report 
3. Indicator 1.2: % of citizens’ complaints 
addressed by the Ombudsman Office, on 
annual basis (SDG 10.3.1)
Baseline: 39.5% written appeals 
responded (2018)
Target: 50% or greater
Data source: Ombudsman’s Office 
Source: Ombudsman’s Office
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: age, sex, ethnicity, 
region
Indicator 1.3.3. Ombudsman’s Office accreditation 
to the Global Alliance of National Human Rights 
Institutions 
Baseline: No (2020) 
Target: Yes (2025) 
Data source: Ombudsman’s annual reports National priority or goal: Innovative development of national economy to create high productivity sectors and industries; establish advanced market economy; and improve regional socio-economic 
development and digitization of all sectors of economy
UNSCDF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #2. By 2025, conditions for sustainable and inclusive economic diversification are strengthened with competitive private and financial sectors, 
enhanced trade and investment promotion, and the adoption of new technologies 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
1. Indicator 2.1. Annual growth rate of 
real GDP per employed person (SDG 
8.2.1)
Baseline: 3.4 % (VNR, 2019)
Target: Not less than 4% annually (2025) 
Source: SSC
Frequency: annual
Output 2.1. Public institutions and private sector have 
strengthened regulatory, institutional, and human capacity for 
realization of diversification, digitalization, and trade 
promotion with focus on creation of employment 
opportunities, including for women and vulnerable groups
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of policies, regulatory acts, and 
mechanisms developed to enhance trade capacity, 
promote favourable investment climate, and strengthen 
business environment 
Baseline: 1 
Target: At least 5 (2025) 
Data source: Project reports, national partner reports
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of approved initiatives to 
enhance trade capacity, investment climate, and 
business environment 
Baseline: 0 
Target: At least 5 (2025) 
Data source: Project reports, national partner reports
Parliament
MFE
Ministry of 
Agriculture and 
Environmental 
Protection (MAEP)
SAC
State Agency for 
Industry
Ministry of Trade 
and Foreign 
Economic 
Relations
MLSP
SSC
Central Bank 
State Bank for 
Foreign Economic 
Affairs
State Raw 
Materials and 
Commodities 
Exchange
SCS
SIO
Ministry of 
Construction and 
Architecture
(MCA)
Commercial banks 
Union of 
Industrialists and 
Entrepreneurs
(UIE)
CSOs
Regular: 370
2. Indicator 2.4: Turkmenistan exports, 
mln USD (SDG 17.11.1)
Baseline: 11.65 bln (2018) State Statistics 
Committee
Target: 13.25 bln (Presidential 
Programme 2019-2025 (2025)
Source: SSC
Frequency: annual
Other: 9,000
3. Indicator 2.3. Number of 
entrepreneurs, disaggregated by sex 
(SDG 5.5.2)
Baseline: Male: 73,300; Female: 20,400 
(SSC, 2018)
Target: 5% increase annually (2025)
Source: SSC
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: age, sex
Output 2.2. Private sector, particularly small and mediumsized enterprises (SMEs) and women entrepreneurs, utilize 
simplified procedures of doing business and have expanded 
access to information, technology and financing
Indicator 2.2.1. Share of private sector in GDP 
(excluding fuel and energy), (SDG 17.17.1)
Baseline: 68.5% (VNR, 2019)
Target: 73.2% (Presidential Programme for Socioeconomic Development of Turkmenistan for 2019-
2025)
Data source: SSC
Indicator 2.2.2. Share of women-led SMEs.
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Data source: SSCIndicator 2.2.3: Number of initiatives for improvement 
of formal and informal professional and vocational 
education10
Baseline: 0
Target: At least 8 (2025)
Data source: Project reports, national partner reports
4. Indicator 2.2. Total amount of credits 
provided by credit institutions, million
TMT and % distribution by enterprises 
(public, non-public) and population (SDG 
8.10.1, SDG 9.3.2) 
Baseline: Total: 76,321 (2018), 
Public: 83.7%, Non-public: 3.6%, 
Population: 12.7%
Target: 2% increase annually (2025)
Source: Central Bank
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: age, sex, ownership, 
region
Output 2.3. Innovative financial and banking instruments 
introduced to support green economy and SDG financing, 
including for SMEs 
Indicator 2.3.2. Number of normative and regulatory 
acts to develop financial markets 
Baseline: 0
Target: At least 3 (2025)
Data source: Project reports national partner reports
Indicator 2.3.3. Number of new financial and banking 
instruments introduced 
Baseline: 0 
Target: At least 3 (2025)
Data source: Project reports, national partners reports
National priority or goal: Innovative development of national economy to create high productivity sectors and industries; rational use of natural resources, environment protection, addressing climate 
change 
UNSCDF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #3. By 2025, there is effective design and implementation of disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation and mitigation measures, enabling a 
more rational use of resources, increased resilience, and a ‘green’ economy transition.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 2. Accelerating structural transformations for sustainable development;
1. Indicator 3.1. Number of gendersensitive adaptation and mitigation 
measures implemented and scaled up
(SDG13.2.1; 13.3.2)
Baseline: 0
Target: 3 (2025)
Source: MAEP
Frequency: annual
Output 3.1. Policy and regulatory framework is strengthened 
to facilitate climate change adaptation and mitigation, 
disaster risk reduction and monitoring mechanisms
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of policies, regulatory acts, and 
monitoring mechanisms developed to promote climate 
adaptation and mitigation and disaster risk reduction 
Baseline: 4
Target: 10
Data source: Government reports, project data
Output 3.2. Strategic plans and investments are designed and 
implemented to promote water efficiency, sustainable land 
use, conservation of biodiversity, ecosystem management, 
restoration of degraded lands, disaster risk reduction, 
MAEP
MOE
MCA
MFE
MFA
State Committee 
for Water Economy
State Agency for 
Transport
State Concern 
Turkmengas
State Concern 
Turkmenoil 
Regular: 370
2. Indicator 3.4. Number of nationwide, 
sectoral or community-based plans, 
investments and/or measures implemented 
for the sustainable and integrated 
management of land, water, biological 
Source: MAEP, State Committee on 
Water Economy, Ministry of Power 
Energy 
Frequency: annual
Other: 20,000
10 Contributes to UNSDCF outcome indicator 5
3 diversity, energy and other natural 
resources that take into account gender 
aspects (SDG 6.4, 6.3 and 15.1.1, 15.2.1, 
15.3.1)
Baseline: National Strategy on Climate 
Change, (2020)
Target: 3
3. Indicator 3.5. Number of velayats and 
communities implementing programmes to 
strengthen disaster risk reduction, 
preparedness and response to climaterelated hazards and natural disasters in line 
with the Sendai Framework for DRR, 
which are gender sensitive and have sex 
disaggregated data (SDG 6.4, 1.5.2; 
11.b.2, 13.1.3)
Baseline: TBD, MOD
Target: TBD, MOD
4. Indicator 3.3. Extent to which 
knowledge products for sustainable 
development (including climate change 
education) are included in national 
education curricula, teacher education, and 
student assessment as well as media and 
other public information dissemination 
tools (SDG 12.8.1)
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 4 (2025)
Source: Ministry of Defense
Frequency: annual
Source: MOE
Frequency: annual
sustainable energy, use of renewables, and green urban 
development, with gender equality and women's 
empowerment considerations
Indicator 3.2.1. Number hectares of land restored or 
under sustainable use 
Baseline: 1,000
Target: 100,000
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of protected areas under 
sustainable conservation and climate-resilient 
management
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Indicator 3.2.3. Number urban and agri-rural 
communities benefiting from implementation of 
mitigation, adaptation, disaster and climate risk 
programmes, plans and measures 
Baseline: 4
Target: 4 urban and 10 agri-rural communities 
(35% women beneficiaries)
Data source: Government reports, project data
Indicator 3.2.4. Number of energy efficiency methods 
and use of renewable practices, technical norms, 
standards and incentives for energy efficiency for 
households, industries, and green urban development
Baseline: 4
Target: 15
Data source: Government reports, project data
Indicator 3.2.5. Number of updated or newly developed 
maps of seismic micro-zones for human settlements in 
seismic-prone areas 
Baseline: 1
Target: 2
Data source: Reports of Institute of Seismology and 
Atmospheric Physics under AOS
Parliament
Municipalities
Banks
UIE
SSC
State Standards 
Agency
Ministry of 
Defence (MOD)
Ministry of 
Education (MOE)
Academy of 
Sciences (AOS)
National media
CSOs
Output 3.3. Green economy, climate and disaster risk 
reduction awareness and knowledge are increased through 
educational programmesIndicator 3.3.1. Number of state organizations and 
entities exposed to climate and DRR policies and 
practices
Baseline: 10
Target: 30
Indicator 3.3.2.Number of research products and 
publications prepared on green growth and DRR
Baseline: 5
Target: 30
Data source: Government reports, project data
National priority or goal: Ensure high-level human capital development as a result of improvement in quality of social services
UNSCDF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP #4. By 2025, the population of Turkmenistan enjoys higher quality and inclusive health and social protection services 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 2. Accelerating structural transformations for sustainable development
1. Indicator 4.7. Tuberculosis case 
notification rate per 100,000 (SDG 3.3)
Baseline: 32.9 (2019)
Target: To be determined
Source: Ministry of Health and Medical 
Industry of Turkmenistan (MHMIT)
routine data
Source: MHMIT routine data
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: age, sex
Output 4.1. National health services provide quality treatment 
for tuberculosis and other infectious diseases:
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of laboratory-confirmed 
patients with drug resistant tuberculosis enrolled in 2nd
line treatment, annually
Baseline: 838 (NTP, 2019)
Target: 850 per year
Data source: National tuberculosis programme routine 
data
Disaggregation: Age, sex
Indicator 4.1.2. Number of patients with drug resistant 
tuberculosis who received social services 
Baseline: 1,148 (2019)
Target: TBD
Data source: National Red Crescent Society reports
Disaggregation: Sex, multidrug resistant and 
extensively drug resistant tuberculosis
MHMIT
Parliament
MLSP
MOE
MFE; 
Ministry of Internal 
Affairs
ISLD
National Red 
Crescent Society of 
Turkmenistan; 
CSOs
Regular: 0
Other: 15,000
2. Indicator 4.3. Mortality rate attributed to 
cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, or 
chronic respiratory disease (SDG 3.4.1)
Baseline: Proxy: Death likelihood, 24.5% 
(MOHMI, 2017) 
Target: 1.5% annual reduction
Source: MHMIT routine data
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: sex
Output 4.2. National health services provide high-quality 
treatment for major non-communicable diseases (NCDs)
Indicator 4.2.1. 80% availability of the affordable basic 
technologies and essential medicines to treat major 
NCDs in public facilities
Baseline: Not applicable (N/A)
Target: 80%
Data source: Health facilities assessment, annualIndicator 4.2.2. Number of patients with NCDs who 
received community support services, by age and sex
Baseline: N/A
Target: TBD 
Data source: National Red Crescent Society reports
3. Indicator 4.1. Number of people covered 
by social protection systems (including 
community-based social services), by sex 
and type of beneficiaries. (SDG 1.3.1) 
Baseline: (MLSP, 2018)
Pension
Total: 457,392, including disaggregation 
by sex and residence: 
Male: 167,545
Female: 289,947
Rural: 231,459
Social Allowances (mother of new-born 
child, PWD, WWII veterans or their wife, 
state social allowance)
(MLSP, 2018)
Target: To be provided by Ministry of 
Labor and Social Protection 
Source: MLSP
Frequency: annual
Disaggregation: sex, age, region
Output 4.3. Social protection system and outreach 
strengthened for vulnerable groups
Indicator 4.3.1. Numbers of people from vulnerable 
groups reached by pilot community-based services
Baseline: 0 
Target: At least 1,000 (2025)
Data source: Project reports, national partner reports
Indicator 4.3.2. Number of social services provided 
through social contracting mechanism by CSOs
Baseline: 0 
Target: At least 5 (2025)
Data source: Project reports, national partner reports