File Name: TLS-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Timor-Leste
Country Code: TLS
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
9 July 2020
Original: English
2009322X (E) 290720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Timor-Leste (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ………… 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management …………………………………………………….…………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Timor-Leste (2021-2025)…………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Timor-Leste has made progress on sustainable development and poverty reduction since the 
1999 referendum. Its Strategic Development Plan, 2011-2030, aims to transition Timor-Leste from 
a low-income to an upper-middle-income country by 2030, prioritizing three objectives: a 7 per cent
annual economic growth rate; a 10 per cent reduction in the poverty rate; and the creation of 
60,000 new jobs annually1. Timor-Leste is preparing to graduate from least-developed country and 
join the Association of South-East Asian Nations. The common country analysis and the Voluntary 
National Review, 2019, both acknowledge that Timor-Leste has made good progress towards 
several of the Sustainable Development Goals; has developed independent electoral and oversight 
institutions; and is committed to state-building. 
2. Nevertheless, Timor-Leste is unlikely to achieve any of the Goals by 2030. While those living 
below the international poverty line ($1.90/day)2fell from 47.2 per cent in 2007 to 30.3 per cent in 
20143, multidimensional poverty (46 per cent) is the highest in Southeast Asia.4 The slowdown of 
the economy since 20115, the over-reliance on the Petroleum Fund to finance public expenditure6, 
and the increasing proportion (83 per cent) of unemployed youth7are likely to deepen poverty and 
exacerbate inequalities. While 74 per cent of the population is under 35 years old, state investment 
in human capital is low.
3. As a small island developing State, Timor-Leste is the 15th most vulnerable country to climateinduced disasters8
, putting coastal and mountainous communities at risk. It also faces the slow-onset 
threats of increased temperature and drought, which reduce water availability and agricultural 
livelihoods to 70 per cent of the people. The cost of building and maintaining infrastructure9
exacerbates the vulnerability of Timor-Leste to climate-induced disasters. 
4. Informed by the common country analysis, the United Nations developed its second Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework10 supporting the Strategic Development Plan. The 
framework was developed through consultations with the Government, civil society and the private 
sector that included participatory co-designing sessions. The framework has human rights principles 
at its core and builds synergies across United Nations organizations in line with the ‘one UN’ reform 
agenda. Following identification of the most vulnerable groups in the common country analysis, 
UNDP will target young women and men not in employment, education or training; the multidimensionally poor; and survivors of gender-based violence as the most direct way to contribute to 
the Sustainable Development Goals, applying the principle of ‘leaving no one behind.’
5. The common country analysis identifies climate change, multidimensional poverty, and lack of 
access to high-quality services as causal factors of the development challenges facing Timor-Leste. 
UNDP has a comparative advantage at the intersection of those three factors11, as it works directly 
with youth, women, the poor, and government partners to promote economic opportunities, 
resilience to climate change, and accountable institutions that deliver high-quality services. 
6. The cooperation framework underscores that limited access to sustainable economic 
opportunities and decent work is linked to a non-diversified economy. UNDP has a unique role in 
the intersection of a green/blue economy, livelihoods linked to nature-based solutions, and climate 
1 Government of Timor-Leste, Strategic Development Plan, 2010; Government programme of the Eighth Constitutional Government
2
Purchasing power parity, 2011, equivalent to $40.45 per person/month, at 2014 Timor-Leste prices
3 World Bank world development indicators
4 UNDP Human Development Report, 2019
5 Ministry of Finance national accounts, 2000-2018.
6 Timor-Leste Economic Report: Moving Beyond Uncertainty, April 2019. Washington DC: World Bank (p.10)
7 Youth unemployment, 24.7 per cent in urban areas and 8.4 per cent in rural areas (Labour Force Survey, 2016)
8 World Risk Report, 2019
9 Timor-Leste Public Expenditure Review: Infrastructure. Ministry of Finance and World Bank, March 2015
10 U
itd NtiStiblDlt CtiFk fTiLt20212025DP/DCP/TLS/3
resilience12. The independent country programme evaluation noted that the local development 
model in Oé-cusse should be replicated, as it integrated job creation with climate risk-informed local 
planning; successfully identified capacity, market, and technological bottlenecks; and helped start 
and grow businesses, improve productivity and generate diverse livelihoods13. 
7. The growing number of young men and women in the labour market need skills, competencies, 
incentives and networks to seize job opportunities or grow as entrepreneurs. This is vital, as 
20.3 per cent of 15-24-year-old youth (23.7 per cent female) were not in employment, education or 
training in 201514. The UNDP Accelerator Lab, and its experience in youth entrepreneurship,
position it uniquely to contribute in this area15. The integrated Business Incubator programme in 
Oé-cusse, and the Youth Innovation Hub (Knua Juventude) in Dili, were evaluated as innovative 
approaches with the potential to generate sustainable businesses for youth. The evaluation identified 
key challenges related to scaling up, attracting government funding, and addressing structural 
impediments to youth entrepreneurship. 
8. The cooperation framework notes that the ability of Timor-Leste to cope with the impact of 
climate change, and to protect its natural resources, must be strengthened. UNDP is well positioned 
to deepen its engagement in the climate space, having strengthened government institutional 
capacity and knowledge on disaster risk management and climate change adaptation at the national 
and municipal levels16. However, the pending approval of policies on climate change, renewable 
energy, and disaster management, suggests the need for stronger policy advocacy and civil society 
watchdog capabilities. UNDP has ample experience in community-based natural resource 
management, participatory design, monitoring climate-resilient infrastructure, community outreach,
and taking climate-smart technology to municipalities17. 
9. The cooperation framework highlights that the persistence of multidimensional poverty is partly 
driven by lack of access to quality public services – particularly for women and excluded groups –
and non-inclusive decision-making processes. Based on its record in institutional capacity 
development, municipal strategic planning and judicial reform, UNDP is well positioned to advance 
public administration reform and support the decentralization process. UNDP is a trusted and 
impartial partner18 with proven capacity in strengthening approaches that promote ownership and 
sustainability19, and has developed blueprints for inclusive municipal plans20. Past UNDP
contributions to deconcentration have positioned it to support decentralization efforts, serve as a 
platform for integrating the wider support of United Nations organizations, and demonstrate greater 
impact in localizing the Sustainable Development Goals. 
10. UNDP support for the organizational development of the judicial sector and training of police 
has led to more efficient management of justice, greater knowledge of, and access to, formal justice, 
and support to survivors of domestic violence21. With UNDP comparative advantages to expand the 
reach of mobile courts to survivors of gender-based violence and reduce the discrimination that 
women, girls and vulnerable groups (such as the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex 
communities, and people with disabilities) face when accessing justice, it will open opportunities to 
support the longer-term goal of establishing more permanent courts.
11. Within the United Nations system, UNDP integrates the technical expertise of United Nations 
organizations to tackle complex challenges. As a part of the coordinated support of the 
12 Independent country programme evaluation, 2019 (p.20)
13 Ibid. (p.31)
14 Census, 2015
15 Independent country programme evaluation, 2019 (p.21)
16 Ibid. (p.16)
17 Results-oriented annual report, 2019 (p. 1)
18 UNDP Partnership Survey, 2017
19 Outcome Evaluation of Democratic Governance (2018), UNDP Timor-Leste (p.12, p.37)
20 I
ddt tlti2019 (31)United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, UNDP will chair the 
governance results group and co-chair the climate change and resilience results group. The value 
added by UNDP is demonstrated by its brokering role in bringing the technical expertise of the 
wider United Nations system together with the European Union, the World Bank Group, and the 
private sector to promote partnership and joint financing for the Sustainable Development Goals.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
12. The UNDP vision for the 2021-2025 programme is to accelerate progress on the Sustainable 
Development Goals in Timor-Leste by reducing vulnerability to poverty and promoting 
resilience to climate change, accountable governance, and economic transformation. Given the 
small island developing States context and challenges in Timor-Leste, UNDP will promote the 
following transformational impacts: green/blue and circular economic development; sustainable 
management of natural resources and innovative public-private cooperation to reduce climate-risks
and strengthen resilience; and gender-responsive, inclusive and human-rights-driven governance. In 
cooperation with the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations country team, UNDP will offer 
bold solutions to address the health and socio-economic impacts of COVID-19, with a focus on the 
most vulnerable communities. 
13. UNDP will lead on three priorities of the cooperation framework: economic opportunities and 
decent work for all (outcome 2); resilience to climate change and sustainable management of 
resources (outcome 6); and accessible, accountable and gender-responsive governance systems, 
institutions and services at the national and municipal levels (outcome 5). Recognizing the 
interconnected nature of the underlying drivers of these outcomes, UNDP will address these 
priorities using five transformational strategies aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan.
14. Strengthening and diversifying livelihoods is a core strategy to reduce vulnerability to poverty, 
promote jobs in the green/blue and circular economies, and increase the resilience of communities 
to cope with climate, health and economic shocks. Risk-informed and gender-sensitive strategic 
planning on climate change is a cross-cutting transformational strategy. It involves supporting 
municipal and national governments in developing evidence-based plans and budgets – and 
implementing those plans to deliver climate-resilient public services and infrastructure. Institutional 
strengthening is integral to ensuring that government institutions and municipalities have the 
capacities, systems, and tools to plan, finance, implement and monitor public and private 
investments and to deliver citizen services. Promoting accountability and strengthening civil society
are crucial for transforming the structural and democratic conditions needed to progress on the 
Sustainable Development Goals by ‘leaving no one behind’. Strengthening the watchdog function 
of civil society and promoting the accountability of duty-bearers will help ensure the ‘social 
contract.’ Addressing discrimination and ensuring that people (especially female farmers, young 
unemployed women, female survivors of gender-based violence and vulnerable communities) can 
access high-quality services and participate meaningfully in gender-responsive institutions and 
decision-making processes are preconditions for achieving the UNDP vision. Gender equality is 
thus an important objective integrated across all priority areas and strategies, and UNDP will ensure
that women and youth are active shapers of development solutions.
Sustainable economic opportunities and decent work for all 
15. Recognizing the need to ‘build back differently’ in the post-pandemic reality, UNDP will 
contribute to developing twenty-first century skills, competencies, networks and digital capacities
among young men and women to improve their employability while protecting small and microenterprises from the worst effects of the expected economic recession. Building on previous 
successful initiatives such as the Youth Innovation Hub, UNDP will utilize the Accelerator Lab to 
support young men and women in establishing innovative, scalable and digitized businesses. UNDP 
will address concerns of sustainability by building the capacity of government, businesses and 
service providers through an inclusive platform to foster entrepreneurship and employment services 
for young men and women. It will expand the connectivity of youth through regional and global 
entrepreneurship platforms offering peertopeer exchange and growthThrough the Integrated DP/DCP/TLS/3
collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO) and the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) – will support the Government in developing stronger linkages between publicprivate financing; unlock the potential for climate, diaspora, health and other financing for the 
Sustainable Development Goals; and support policy reforms towards a more diverse economy.
16. The assumption underpinning this solution is that young men and women are hindered from 
becoming entrepreneurs and creating sustainable businesses, since they have yet to develop twentyfirst century workplace experiences and knowledge, such as digital, negotiation and communication, 
vocational and technical skills. They are disconnected from private sector opportunities and lack 
space to nurture experiments. UNDP will work with the private sector, development partners and 
young innovators to provide integrated business services and promote youth entrepreneurship, while 
the Integrated National Financing Framework will engage government and partners in policy 
dialogues to increase Sustainable Development Goals financing and investments in human capital 
to address supply-side constraints.
17. Women and men in rural communities are vulnerable to poverty and climate risks due to a lack 
of diversified livelihoods and decent work. UNDP will draw on its experience with governmentfinanced area-based local economic development in Oé-cusse to provide technical support to 
municipalities in acquiring sustainable funding for business services that will create climate-resilient 
livelihoods and jobs. To ensure sustainability, UNDP will work with oversight institutions such as 
the national Parliament, the Anti-corruption Commission, key ministries, and civil society,
strengthening capacities to legislate, monitor and use evidence-based data for accountability. By
enabling government to work in an integrated and participatory way with communities, civil society 
and the private sector, municipal governments can provide high-quality services and generate jobs 
and sustainable, climate-smart livelihoods. Efforts will be made to generate sustainable livelihood 
options through the effective management of natural resources, land and marine ecosystems, and 
the blue economy as a whole. Understanding the bottlenecks in diversifying the economy, and 
opportunities for greening it, will deepen knowledge and identify triggers for job creation. 
Addressing gender barriers and access to market and finance, and reducing obstacles to establishing 
sustainable businesses, will create an enabling environment for small and micro-enterprises. This 
will diversify livelihood opportunities, build community resilience to shocks, and reduce 
vulnerability to climate-induced poverty.
Resilience to climate change and the sustainable management of ecosystems 
18. To support the government in meeting its commitment under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, delivering on its nationally determined contributions, and 
promoting a circular economy, UNDP, in collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization 
(FAO), IOM, the World Food Programme (WFP), and the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk 
Reduction, will address the causes of vulnerability to climate change while brokering partnerships 
for transformational climate action. Community-level engagement will intersect with national- and 
regional-level engagements through climate information systems to inform national polices, plans 
and investments in adaptation and mitigation. The impact of UNDP in this area will be measured by
a national climate action platform where the Government will facilitate a whole-of-society, wholeof-government and whole-of-private-sector response to the climate crisis. It will serve as a facility 
to broker larger partnerships for innovative initiatives under the UNDP small island developing 
States offer to address frontier challenges faced by Timor-Leste, and foment new collaborations on 
climate action, new public and private financing for circular and blue economies, and enhanced
capacities for evidence-based climate-smart policies, plans and budgets. 
19. Technical and institutional capacity support to cross-sectoral ministries will enable the 
collection, analysis and use of data on climate change. This will improve evidence-based national 
planning, budgeting and coordination on climate risk and ecosystems management at the municipal 
level, and will strengthen reporting on international conventions on climate change. To improve 
public awareness and oversight of government investments and reporting on climate change, UNDP 
will strengthen substantive knowledge within civil society organizations and the private sector. This 
ill tht lid idflitiftitfditlikiand programme design and implementation to improve community resilience to climate risks and 
climate-induced poverty. 
20. In partnership with the Green Climate Fund, UNDP will scale up community-driven design, 
implementation and monitoring of climate-resilient infrastructure, reinforcing green economic 
diversification by protecting assets and livelihoods against climate-risk. With support from the 
Global Environment Facility, UNDP will support communities and government authorities in 
improving the monitoring and management of land, marine and coastal ecosystems. This will 
enhance the resilience of communities – particularly youth and female farmers – to climate-risks,
promoting diverse livelihoods and feeding into green/blue and circular economies and partnerships. 
Support to community leadership in designing and monitoring climate-resilient infrastructure and 
resource management will lead to greater municipal commitment to the infrastructure. 
21. UNDP will prioritize strengthening the capabilities of government and civil society to engage 
in climate negotiations to implement the Paris climate declaration and fully meet its nationally 
determined contributions. Based on lessons learned, UNDP will strengthen the role of the private 
sector, social businesses and non-governmental organizations to scale up alternative energy 
interventions (biomass, wind and solar). As a small island developing State, Timor-Leste stands to 
benefit from green/blue circular economy models, and UNDP will facilitate society- and 
government-wide forums and platforms to integrate those models at national and subnational levels.
Accessible, accountable and gender-responsive governance systems, institutions and services at 
national and municipal levels
22. To address the challenges of accountable, inclusive and participatory governance and highquality public services, UNDP will strive towards transformational impact by helping municipalities 
achieve their own vision of rights-based local development, learning through South-South 
cooperation and experience shared by regional and global networks (such as the United Nations 
Office for South-South Cooperation and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the 
Pacific). Facilitating the participation of excluded groups22 in democratic institutions and local 
governance will improve design and delivery of citizens’ services, ensuring no one is left behind –
especially during the critical pandemic recovery period of 2021-2022. Working closely with 
government institutions and partners such as the European Union, the Korea International 
Cooperation Agency (KOICA), Japan, and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Australia), 
UNDP will strengthen the capacities of public administration officials and municipal authorities as 
part of the decentralization process to manage local assets, collect data, and develop risk-informed 
local investment plans. UNDP will support an integrated approach to public finance and institutional 
strengthening, improving the governance of fiscal space and decentralization. Municipal 
governments will be better equipped to design and finance evidence-based investments for excluded 
groups and be accountable to feedback. UNDP will provide technical assistance to strengthen the 
watchdog function of oversight institutions (such as the Anti-Corruption Commission and national 
human rights institutions) and civil society organizations to reinforce demand-side accountability 
and human rights principles.
23. Increased participation of excluded groups in elections and the local governance process, and 
improving access and use of sex-disaggregated data in planning (through the municipal data portal)
will lead to inclusive, risk-informed public service provision. Strengthened gender-responsive and 
strategic planning and accountability at the municipal level will promote resilience to climate 
change, improve local economic development, and generate jobs and diverse livelihoods for men 
and women. Improving the accountability of national institutions and the effectiveness of oversight 
institutions and civil society organizations will also improve the sustainability of other priority areas 
22 ‘Excluded groups’ are households that are multi-dimensionally poor; survivors of gender-based violence; female farmers, households 
depending on one person’s income or remittances; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex community; young women and men (15-24) 
not in employment, education or training; households with no access to water, sanitation, electricity and other forms of infrastructure; persons 
with disabilities; residents of areas vulnerable to climate-induced disasters; under-represented youth; and women.DP/DCP/TLS/3
by holding government to account for international commitments and implementation of 
Sustainable Development Goals-based policies and programmes.
24. Ensuring that excluded groups, especially survivors of gender-based violence, can access highquality rule-of-law institutions and justice services remains a challenge. As part of the European 
Union–United Nations Spotlight joint initiative, led by UN-Women, UNDP will work with 
United Nations partners and the Ministry of Justice to provide community outreach and enhanced
understanding of formal justice services. UNDP will strengthen the capacity of rule-of-law 
institutions, including the police, to provide high-quality services to all citizens, especially excluded 
groups. If excluded groups are supported to engage and trust the formal judicial sector, they will use 
formal justice services in addition to the customary law prevalent in the country. Furthermore, if 
rule of law institutions are supported by UNDP and partners – including KOICA and the Australian 
Police Force – to provide services such as mobile courts and vulnerable persons units to survivors 
of gender-based violence, more gender-responsive and accessible judicial services and systems will 
be made available. This will strengthen gender justice with and help prevent violence against women 
and girls. 
25. The COVID-19 outbreak shows the importance of digitally literate and connected societies, 
businesses and governments for effective prevention and response. As Timor-Leste is one of the 
least digitally connected countries, UNDP will partner with the United Nations Capital 
Development Fund (UNCDF) to unleash the potential of the economy and the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution. UNDP will work with banks, micro-finance institutions and mobile operators to 
strengthen access to digital finance, mobile banking and payment services. UNDP will also 
strengthen the capacities of municipalities to operate online citizen portals to promote access to 
information in partnership with the European Union. 
26. UNDP will partner with the resident coordinator system and other United Nations organizations
to achieve the cooperation framework and national priorities. UNDP will continue working with the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to strengthen innovation work streams in e-governance 
(unique citizen identifier and other citizen service platforms), and work with IOM, WFP and FAO 
on climate mitigation, adaptation and circular blue/green economy models. With UN-Women, 
UNFPA, the International Labour Organization, and UNICEF, UNDP will work to eliminate all 
forms of violence against women and girls; work with WHO and IOM on diaspora and pro-health 
financing strategies; and engage United Nations Volunteers to leverage volunteerism in programme 
implementation. UNDP will support the Office of the Resident Coordinator in sharpening the focus 
and prioritization of United Nations organizations by co-creating space for mutual learning, and 
engage in joint thought leadership, joint programming and innovative management of the 
United Nations common premises. UNDP will build on its South-South cooperation with Indonesia 
and India, and will explore new partnerships. 
III. Programme and risk management 
27. Successful implementation of the country programme will depend on managing risks and 
embedding agile, innovative programming to address challenges. During this programme cycle, 
UNDP will become a learning and knowledge-brokering platform, providing implementation 
support services to the Government. Our approach to programming will evolve into a more 
anticipatory network. UNDP will strengthen its capacity for horizon-scanning and foresight to 
anticipate and minimize risks. This will involve dialogue with government, communities, civil 
society organizations and development partners. Early-warning and risk-management arrangements 
will be led by the Resident Coordinator. UNDP will apply UNDP social and environmental 
standards and accountability mechanisms to manage the risks outlined below.
28. The political deadlock since 2018 underscores the high risk of a continued political impasse, 
with reduced efficiency of public institutions and delayed implementation of government 
programmes and budgets. The ability of the Government to drive new initiatives forward and secure 
funding and co-financing for UNDP programmes may be undermined. UNDP will mitigate that risk and context analysis, and introducing adaptive measures to programming when needed. UNDP will 
support the Government in delivering services in times of instability when government mechanisms 
could be disrupted.
29. The second risk is the high degree of economic vulnerability induced by reliance on oil revenues
to fund public expenditure. The decline in petroleum production and global oil prices, combined 
with increased withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund, could threaten fiscal sustainability and 
undermine the ability of the economy to create and sustain new businesses and jobs. It could affect
social cohesion and increase the risk of political instability. Under the guidance of the Resident 
Coordinator, and jointly with other United Nations organizations, UNDP will mitigate that risk by 
supporting the Government in operationalizing the Integrated National Financing Framework to 
mobilize additional public and private financing. UNDP will work with donors and the Government 
to promote economic diversification and enhance public debate on fiscal sustainability and 
Sustainable Development Goals financing. 
30. The third risk is the increasing vulnerability of the country to climate-induced disasters and 
health epidemics, and its limited preparedness and coping capacity. Those risks may disrupt UNDP 
programme implementation, but they also present a long-term threat to livelihoods and poverty 
reduction. UNDP will work with the Humanitarian Partners Group and the Government to ensure 
mitigation planning against climate and disaster risks and health epidemics, as well as business 
continuity strategies and plans for government partners. UNDP will apply its social and 
environmental standards in programming, establish grievance mechanisms and conduct impact 
assessments. UNDP will embed proactive measures for foresight and anticipatory governance to 
enable it to identify risks and predict, reprioritize and reprogramme to respond to emerging trends 
and crises, including the impact of COVID-19. 
31. To enhance mutual accountability, UNDP will establish a country programme board co-chaired 
by UNDP and the government coordinating agency. This will enhance stakeholder engagement in 
the programme, promote sustainability of programme results, and maintain dialogue on key 
development challenges, including resource mobilization and sustainable financing arrangements. 
UNDP will partner with embassies, civil society organizations and international organizations to 
engage on strategic issues. UNDP will reinforce its position as a learning and knowledge-based 
organization by promoting collective intelligence and integrating innovative co-design, exploration 
and experimentation principles and innovative partnerships. UNDP will ensure that youth, women 
and excluded groups serve as active agents of change and co-owners of our programmes. 
32. This programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the primary unit 
of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the 
programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and headquarters
levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies 
and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
33. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
34. UNDP will seek to engage innovative and agile data collection and monitoring methods 
(including collective intelligence, micro-narratives, and user-generated feedback) to monitor 
progress towards development outcomes and capture transformational results. UNDP will embed a 
robust monitoring and evaluation system in the programme and its projects, combining qualitative 
and quantitative data. 
35. As part of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework for monitoring 
and evaluationUNDP will co-lead two cooperation framework results groups and will contribute DP/DCP/TLS/3
with Sustainable Development Goals, national plan, and Strategic Plan indicators. UNDP projects 
will conduct results monitoring, jointly where relevant; collect sex-disaggregated data; and report 
on progress annually. UNDP will set up mechanisms to track and ensure the meaningful 
participation of women, people with disabilities, and youth, in decision-making, and will continue 
to use the gender marker for gender-responsive interventions and results. 
36. In recognition of significant data gaps, UNDP is working with the Ministry of State 
Administration and the Secretary of State for Environment to develop a new municipal open-data 
portal and improve nationwide climate information systems. Those digital initiatives support 
evidence-based and risk-informed municipal strategic planning and real-time decision-making as 
part of the new decentralization process. They will help improve government capacity for data 
collection and enable UNDP to monitor programme progress at the municipal level. 
37. In line with the independent country programme evaluation, the programme will integrate 
individual projects within a thematic portfolio. Sense-making will continue to further promote 
learning approaches to stay ahead of the curve as a development organization working in an unstable 
and fast-changing world – a lesson learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, which has forced to 
reposition priorities and test organizational adaptive capacities. Continuous sense-making will 
ensure complementarity, learning and knowledge management among projects. Using that
approach, through an annual review and the results-oriented annual report, UNDP will synthesize
results across projects and portfolios to show the greater impact produced by programmatic 
synergies. DP/DCP/TLS/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Timor-Leste (2021-2025)
National priority or goal: By 2030 Timor-Leste will have joined the ranks of upper middle-income countries, eradicated extreme poverty and established a sustainable and diversified non-oil economy.
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) outcome involving UNDP No. 2: By 2025, institutions and people throughout Timor-Leste in all their diversity, 
especially women and youth, benefit from sustainable economic opportunities and decent work to reduce poverty. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions, 
UNSDCF outcome indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s)
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Major partners / partnerships
and frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome 
($ millions)
Indicator 2.3.1. Percentage of youth (15-
24) not in education, employment or 
training (Sustainable Development Goals –
SDG indicator 8.6.1)
Baseline: 20% (Male 17%, Female 24%)
Target: 18%
Data source: Census, 2015 Output 1.1. Young men and women have improved access to 
sustainable economic opportunities.
Indicator 1.1.1
Number of young men and women benefiting from 
entrepreneurship and employability skills and services 
(IRRF*1.1.1.2)
Baseline (2019): 729 
Target (2025): 2000 (50% female)
Source: UNDP projects
Indicator 1.1.2
Proportion of young men and women employed after their 
employability skills are enhanced by UNDP 
Baseline: 17% employed 
Target: 50% (50% women)
Source: UNDP projects
Private sector
Secretary of State for 
Professional Training and 
Employment
Ministry of State Administration 
(MSA) 
Secretary of State for Youth and 
Sports
Entrepreneurship development 
support institute
United Nations organizations
Regular: 1,549,000
Other: 10,263,471
Indicator 2.1.2: Share of informal 
employment in non-agriculture 
employment, by sex (SDG indicator 8.3.1)
Baseline: 72% (2013); Male 70 %, 
Female 76%
Target: 65%
Source: Labour Force Survey
Data Source: Labour Force 
Survey, 2013
Output 1.2. Vulnerability to multidimensional poverty reduced 
and livelihood opportunities increased, especially among 
rural/coastal communities
Indicator 1.2.1
Number of households with one new additional income stream 
for at least 6 months per year 
Baseline (2019): 1000
Target: 3000 new
Source; UNDP project database 
__________
* IRRF = Integrated Results and Resources Framework
Indicator 1.2.2. Number of new enterprises established with 
UNDP support
Secretary of State for 
Environment (SSE)
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Fisheries (MAF)
MSA
Secretary of State for 
Cooperatives
Banks
Private sector
DonorsBaseline (2019): 91
Target: 500
Source: UNDP project database
UNCDF
United Nations Volunteers 
programme (UNV)
National priority or goal: By 2030, the strong bond between Timorese people and the environment will be restored and our natural resources and environment will be managed sustainably for the benefit 
of all.
UNSDCF outcome involving UNDP #6: By 2025, national and sub national institutions and communities (particularly at-risk populations including women and children) in Timor-Leste are better able to 
manage natural resources and achieve enhanced resilience to climate change impacts, natural and human induced hazards, and environmental degradation, inclusively and sustainably
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Indicator 6.3.2: Progress towards 
sustainable forest management 
(SDG Indicator 15.2.1)
Baseline: 44 sites identified
Target: 1 protected area demarcated each 
year, with management plan
Data source: MAF Output 2:1. Sustainable management of natural resources and 
ecosystems promoted through policies, guidelines, information 
systems, knowledge and community-level conservation
Indicator 2.1.1 
Number of hectares reforested, restored, protected or planted 
and number of households benefited (IRRF1.4.1.2)
Baseline (2019): 2,116 hectares; 21,900 households/109,500 
people (Coastal Resilience Building project)
Target (2025): 90,300 hectares (marine and land); households: 
to be determined
Source: UNDP environment projects
Indicator 2.1.2
Number of policies, strategies, plans, guidelines, systems 
related to sustainable environmental and marine ecosystem
development prepared and submitted for approval
Baseline (2019): 20 
Target: 17 new
Source: UNDP environment projects
MAF
MSA
Municipalities
Civil society organizations
(CSOs)
GCF
GEF
 
SSE
Ministry of Public Works (MPW)
Regular: 600,000
Other: 24,381,500
Indicator 6.2.3: Number of people 
benefiting from the construction and 
retrofitting of sustainable, resilient and 
resource-efficient infrastructure utilizing 
local materials (SDG Indicator 11.c.1) 
Baseline (2019): 103,089 in 
6 municipalities 
Target: 150,000 (50% female)
Data source: UNDP Green 
Climate Fund (GCF) Project 
Document (2020-2026)
Output 2.2. Rural communities benefit from climate resilient 
infrastructure 
Indicator 2.2.1
Number of climate resilient infrastructure units constructed or 
rehabilitated
Baseline: 13 non-climate proofed units/year in each of the 
6 municipalities 
Target: 130
Source: UNDP project reports
Indicator 2.2.2
GEF 
GCF
Department of Foreign Affairs 
and Trade of the Australian 
Government (DFAT)
SSE
PNDS (Programa Nasional 
Dezenvolvimentu Suku)
(National Programme for Village 
Development) SecretariatDP/DCP/TLS/3
Number of men and women benefiting from climate-resilient 
infrastructure
Baseline (2019): 103,089 people in 6 municipalities
Target (2025): 150,000 people (50% women)
Source: UNDP project reports
MSA
Secretary of State for Civil 
Protection 
CSOs
Output 2.3. Innovative partnerships and platforms developed 
for climate action
Indicative indicator 2.3.1
Number of climate action initiatives brokered/supported through 
partnership with development partners, government and private 
sector (including public-private partnership) 
Baseline: 0
Target: 4
Source: GCF project 
Indicator 2.3.2
Number of new partnerships and funding for climate action 
Baseline (year): 0
Target (year): 2
Source: GCF project
GCF
SSE
MPW
MAF
MSA
CSOs
Private sector
United Nations organizations
Development partners
National priority or goal: Public sector management and good governance 
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #5: By 2025, the most excluded people of Timor-Leste are empowered to claim their rights, including freedom from violence, through accessible, 
accountable and gender-responsive governance systems, institutions and services at national and subnational levels
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Indicator 5.3.1: Proportion of population 
who believe decision-making is inclusive 
and responsive, by sex, age, disability and 
population group (SDG indicator 16.7.2)
Baseline: 66.08%
Target: To be confirmed
Data source: Asia Foundation, 
Tatoli Survey 2013-2018 
(2014)
Output 3.1: Excluded groups have increased participation and 
representation in democratic institutions and local governance 
processes 
Indicator 3.1.1
Number of men, women, youth and people with disability 
(PWDs) participating in local planning processes. 
Baseline (2019); Average 311 PWDs/municipality (total 2; 
19% women) 
Target: Average 350 people/municipality (total: 6; 
33% women; 33% youth; 2% PWDs)
Source: UNDP projects
MSA 
Municipalities
Electoral management bodies 
UNV
Media
Regular: 1,150,000
Other: 26,059,504Indicator 3.1.2
Percentage of women and youth participating in elections as 
voters and electoral staff (IRRF2.2.2.2)
Baseline (2018)
Women and youth voters: 49% and 51%
Women and youth electoral staff: 50% women; N/A for youth
Target (next elections)
Women and youth voters: 50% and 60%
Women and youth electoral staff: 50% and 30% 
Source: Electoral management bodies. 
Output 3.2. Capacity for planning, monitoring and 
accountability of national and municipal institutions and CSOs 
improved. 
Indicator 3.2.1
Number of municipalities with climate and gender-responsive 
plans and budgets (IRRF2.3.1.1)
Baseline (2020):0
Target: 6 
Source: UNDP projects 
Indicator 3.2.2
Number of municipalities using municipal data portal for 
planning, budgeting, and monitoring (IRRF2.2.1.1)
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 12
Source: UNDP project reports
Indicator 3.2.2
Number of citizens’ reports and social audits prepared and made 
public by CSOs or community groups
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 6
Source: reports from partner CSOs
Municipalities 
Office of Prime Minister
Secretary of State for Equality 
and Inclusion 
National Parliament 
Civil Service Commission
CSOs
UNV
Anti-corruption Commission
European Union
Korea International Cooperation 
Agency (KOICA)
Indicator 5.1.1: Proportion of victims of 
violence in previous 12 months who 
reported their victimization to competent 
authorities or other officially recognized 
conflict resolution mechanisms 
(SDG indicator 16.3.1)
Baseline
Sought help: 19.5%
Data source: Demographic and 
Health Survey, 2016 
Output 3.3: People, especially excluded groups and women, 
benefit from accessible, high-quality rule-of-law institutions and 
justice services (including police)
Indicative indicator 3.3.1
Number of men and women, including survivors of genderbased violence (GBV), accessing justice services with UNDP
support (IRRF2.2.3.2)
Ministry of Justice 
National Police 
National human rights institutions
Parliament 
MSADP/DCP/TLS/3
Report to police: 4.5%
Report to a lawyer: 0.4%
Target: To be confirmed
Baseline (2019): 552 disputants in Access to Justice Clinics
(133 women) and 6,000 cases (2,000 women) through mobile 
courts
Target (2025): 2,000 disputants (750 female); 11,000 registered 
cases (3,000 female)
Source: project and court database
Indicator 3.3.2
Number of laws, policies or procedures drafted or revised to 
prevent or respond to GBV (IRRF1.6.2.2)
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 4
Source: Spotlight project
Indicator 3.3.4
Gender perspective integrated into all legislation developed 
with UNDP support
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 20
Source: UNDP projects
Municipalities
CSOs
United Nations organizations
EU
KOICA