File Name: TON-CPD-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: Tonga
Country Code: TON
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2017
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2022
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
3 July 2017
Original: English
1713179X (E) 070817
Second regular session 2017
5 to 11 September 2017, New York
Item 10 of the provisional agenda 
UNFPA – Country programmes and related matters
United Nations Population Fund
Subregional programme document for Pacific Island countries and territories
(Fiji; Federated States of Micronesia; Kiribati; Nauru; Palau; Marshall Islands; Samoa; Solomon 
Islands; Tonga; Tuvalu; Vanuatu; Cooks Islands; Niue and Tokelau) 
Proposed indicative UNFPA assistance: $30 million: $7.6 million from regular resources and 
$22.4 million through co-financing modalities and/or 
other resources
Programme period: Five years (2018-2022)
Cycle of assistance: Sixth
Category per decision 2013/31: Yellow
Proposed indicative assistance (in millions of $):
Strategic plan outcome areas Regular 
resources
Other 
resources
Total
Outcome 1 Sexual and reproductive health 3.2 11.5 14.7
Outcome 3 Gender equality and women’s empowerment 2.0 3.3 5.3
Outcome 4 Population dynamics 1.7 7.6 9.3
Programme coordination and assistance 0.7 0 0.7
Total 7.6 22.4 30.01. With approximately 2.4 million people spread across an area equivalent to 15 per 
cent of the earth’s surface, the 14 Pacific Island Countries and Territories (PICTs)
served by the United Nations in the Pacific, present unique challenges and 
opportunities. The region is generally young, with eight of the fourteen PICTs having 
at least 30 per cent of their population below 15 years of age and 50 per cent under 25 
years. This age structure provides the potential for a significant demographic dividend, 
if the right mix of quality education, reproductive choice and decent work can be 
assured
2. The PICTs have small and culturally diverse populations that are vulnerable to 
the effects of climate change. Eight are among the top 20 countries with the highest 
average annual disaster losses scaled by gross domestic product. While Kiribati, 
Tuvalu, Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands are classified as least developed, the 
majority of countries are constrained in their capacities to ensure sustainable and 
equitable human development and to deliver access to quality basic social services.
3. Population dynamics are linked to achieving sustained economic growth and 
prosperity, with significant outmigration, urbanization and ageing all contributing to 
rapidly changing demographic contexts. The rising adolescent birth rates in 8 of 14 
PICTs and the increasing total fertility rate in 6 PICTs are of considerable concern. 
They suggest changes to social norms and limited access to sexual and reproductive 
health and reproductive rights education and services across all age groups.
4. The unmet need for family planning for married women aged 15-49 years is 
above 20 per cent in Samoa, Federated States of Micronesia, Vanuatu, Kiribati, Tonga, 
Nauru, Solomon Islands and Tuvalu, while the contraceptive prevalence rates remain 
below 30 per cent in eight countries of the region. Furthermore, contraceptive 
prevalence rates across the region have remained static or have been declining for 
several decades. 
5. Some PICTs have made good progress in reducing maternal mortality, however,
countries with a maternal mortality ratio above the Sustainable Development Goal target 
of 70/100,000 live births will be prioritized. Cervical cancer is a significant cause of 
morbidity and mortality and poses a significant threat to attainment of the Sustainable 
Development Goals thus negating achievements made in reduction of maternal mortality.
6. Young people are particularly vulnerable, as demonstrated by a high proportion 
of unintended pregnancies (up to 63 per cent of pregnancies for 15-19 year olds) and 
the high levels of violence, including sexual violence. In almost half of the PICTs,
between 10-19 per cent of girls are married between 15 and 19 years of age. 
7. Persisting gender inequality and discrimination of women and girls and 
conservative social and cultural norms create reluctance among health-care workers to 
provide information or services to adolescents and youth. The education sector 
continues to be challenged with incorporating family life education or integrating 
curricula that addresses sexual and reproductive health and rights, gender equality and 
violence against women and girls. 
8. National violence against women prevalence studies completed in ten PICTs 
show that on average, two out of three women experience physical and/or sexual 
intimate partner violence during their lifetime. Limited understanding among decision -
makers and the general population of the causes and consequences of violence against 
women and girls continues to hamper an effective prevention and response. The studies 
indicate that women in PICTs experience severe forms of physical violence and high 
levels of sexual violence, and this results in pregnancies and births due to rape and 
negative health consequences. Survivors of violence have very limited or no access to 
support services which compromises recovery, the quest for justice and rebuilding their 
lives. 
9. Greater availability and utilization of quality data is needed to better inform 
policy and programming decisions, including tracking development progress and ensure that scarce resources will be invested wisely to reach the furthest behind first.
10. The fifth subregional programme review findings affirmed the value of a modest, 
yet strategic, physical presence in seven countries resulting in strengthened 
partnerships and reduced transactions costs with Governments, United Nations
agencies, civil society and donors. The field presence has increased national ownership 
and led to the commitment of national resources in support of the International 
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) goals, along with greater costefficiencies, such as reduced travel. The review also called for intensifying joint 
advocacy with the United Nations and regional partners and underscored the need to 
focus strategically on strengthening UNFPA active participation in joint programming 
and resource mobilization. It highlighted weaknesses in data collection and analysis; a 
limited reflection of the International Conference on Population and Development
commitments in national plans; the need for strong linkages to gender equality in
achieving sexual and reproductive health and realizing reproductive rights; and the 
insufficient linkages between reproductive health and non-communicable diseases.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11. The priorities for the sixth subregional programme have been carefully selected 
based on a robust analysis of available time-series metrics, complemented by an 
evaluation of the current United Nations Development Assistance Framework, a 
common country assessment, 14 country consultations and a systematic review of the 
preceding multi-country programme (2013-2017). Through evidence-informed and 
targeted policy engagement, the new programme will support national policy and 
programming decisions that lead to increased resilience and sustainable development. 
Priorities will contribute to the transformative results of: (a) reducing an unmet need 
for family planning to zero by increasing modern contraceptive prevalence rate; (b)
reducing the adolescent birth rate; (c) increasing coverage of fully qualified skilled 
birth attendants;(d) integrating essential health services for women and girls subject to 
violence within sexual and reproductive health; and (e) improving young people’s 
access to high-quality sexual and reproductive health services and gender-responsive 
family life education.
12. The overarching goal of the programme is to achieve universal access to sexual 
and reproductive health and reproductive rights and reduce maternal mortality and 
morbidity to accelerate progress on the ICPD/Sustainable Development Goals agenda, 
and to improve the lives of women, adolescents and youth in PICTs.
13. In order to mainstream humanitarian programming, UNFPA will work with the 
national authorities to ensure that sexual and reproductive health and reproductive 
rights and the violence against women-related needs of women and young people are 
adequately addressed in preparedness and resilience-building efforts. 
14. These transformative results will be achieved through evidence-informed and 
targeted policy engagement designed to ensure the right data is available at the right 
time to support national policy and programming decisions that lead to increased 
resilience and sustainable development. Opportunities for policy reforms will be 
mapped, evidence- based policy briefs prepared and strategic cost-effective 
interventions advocated throughout the programme cycle. UNFPA will leverage 
strategic partnerships to achieve expected results.
15. The geographic focus will be on up to eight countries (Kiribati, Samoa, Solomon 
Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu, Federated States of Micronesia, Marshall Islands and Fiji)
working with national Governments and non-government organization partners, while
taking full advantage of the United Nations Joint Presence Offices. Policy engagement, 
advocacy and partnerships will be supported in all 14 countries. As other resources 
become available, knowledge management and capacity development will be extended 
to other countries. Further disaggregation and analysis of available and new data will be used to further 
identify the most vulnerable and “reach the furthest behind first”.
17. In close collaboration with national, civil society and United Nations partners, 
the programme will give prominence to resilience-building, disaster risk reduction and 
emergency preparedness and response with a specific focus on sexual and reproductive 
health/gender-based violence in emergencies.
18. The new programme is complementary to key Pacific regional frameworks. It 
will contribute to national and sectoral development strategies and align with the 
International Conference on Population and Development/Sustainable Development 
Goals and relevant global strategies.
19. The programme will contribute directly to: (a) equitable basic services; (b)
gender equality; and (c) human rights outcomes of the 2018-2022 United Nations
Pacific Strategy (UNPS), and indirectly to the remaining three outcomes: (d) climate 
change, disaster resilience and environmental protection; (e) sustainable and inclusive 
economic empowerment; and (f) governance and community engagement. Within each 
of these outcomes, and in support of the principles of “Delivering as One”, South-South 
cooperation and leveraging joint initiatives, UNFPA will work collaboratively with partners 
as a convener and champion of International Conference on Population and 
Development/Sustainable Development Goals.
20. A comprehensive multi-year programme resource mobilization strategy 
elaborating concrete investment opportunities for partners and a communication 
strategy have been developed.
A. Outcome 1: Sexual and reproductive health
21. Output 1: Strengthened access to quality integrated sexual and reproductive 
health services for women, adolescents and youth, across the development 
humanitarian nexus. In collaboration with partners, the programme will seek to achieve 
this output in seven countries (Fiji, Kiribati, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, 
Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Vanuatu). With regular resources, UNFPA will support: 
(a) a review of factors contributing to an unmet need for family planning, to inform 
policy advice and behaviour change communication; (b) advocacy and technical 
assistance to develop sexual and reproductive health costed implementation plans and 
national reproductive commodity health security sustainability strategies; and (c) the 
implementation of the Minimum Initial Service Package at the onset of a crisis. As 
other resources become available, UNFPA will further support: (d) the development of 
guidelines and protocols for delivery of high-quality integrated sexual and 
reproductive health services and quality of care, including for adolescents and youth;
(e) midwifery workforce strengthening; (f) develop cervical cancer policy guidelines;
and (g) establish maternal/perinatal death surveillance and response systems.
22. Output 2: Increased national capacity to design and implement community and 
school-based family life education programmes. In collaboration with partners, 
including youth networks, UNFPA will advocate and provide technical assistance in
five countries (Kiribati, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu) for: (a) the 
formulation and implementation of community and school-based family life education 
that promote human rights and gender equality; (b) quality assurance of the family life 
education curricula; (c) the development of resources and tools for community 
education for marginalized adolescents and youth, including key populations; and (d)
high-level advocacy for safe spaces for adolescent girls.
B. Outcome 3: Gender equality and women’s empowerment
23. Output 1: Increased national capacity to address and promote gender equality 
and the empowerment of women and girls including their reproductive rights and need 
for ending violence against women. Building on the violence against women
prevalence studies, advocacy on the need to effectively address and integrate gender 
equality and women’s empowerment within national, sectoral policies and planning available, capacity of national partners will be strengthened.
24. Output 2: Strengthened integration of violence against women in the national 
health sector. In partnership with national Governments, the United Nations and civil 
society partners, the programme will seek to achieve this output in Fiji, Kiribati, 
Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu. UNFPA will advocate and provide technical assistance
for the establishment and integration of a health sector response to violence against 
women into national health systems; and in strengthening functional referral networks
that provide multisectoral services. In addressing violence against women, UNFPA will 
support capacity building of health workers and the development and use of guidelines
and evidence-based protocols.
C. Outcome 4: Population dynamics
25. Output 1: Strengthened national statistical systems to ensure increased 
availability, analysis and utilization of high-quality, disaggregated ICPD/Sustainable 
Development Goals-related data, with a focus on informing national and sectoral 
priorities, policies and programming in development and humanitarian situations. In 
collaboration with national statistical offices, the Pacific Community, United Nations
agencies and other partners, the programme will aim to achieve this in Fiji, Kiribati, 
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, and Vanuatu, by supporting: (a) utilization of the 
results of the census, the demographic health survey and other surveys, administrative 
and evaluation data; (b) development of evidence-based policy briefs and advocacy 
strategies for engaging in policy discussions for key SRHR, gender equality and 
violence against women, population issues including in humanitarian context; and (c)
support for national statistical strategies which enhance public access to data and 
provide timely and relevant evidence for national and sectoral development and 
humanitarian planning, monitoring and evaluation.
26. Output 2: Strengthened use of demographic intelligence to improve policies, 
programmes and advocacy. In collaboration with national Governments, civil society, 
regional partners and the United Nations agencies, the programme will seek to achieve 
this output in all 14 countries. UNFPA will support: (a) strengthening of partnerships 
designed to support the ICPD and Development/Sustainable Development Goals
agenda; (b) development of evidence-based advocacy policy briefs on sexual and 
reproductive health, gender equality and violence against women; and (c) integration 
of the ICPD/Sustainable Development Goals issues into national platforms. 
III. Programme and risk management
27. The subregional programme document outlines UNFPA contributions to national 
and regional results, and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive 
Board for results alignment with resources made available to the programme. 
Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and headquarters levels are 
prescribed in the UNFPA programme and operations policies and procedures, and the 
internal control framework.
28. Delivering the programme has unique challenges and risks such as management 
of investments in multiple countries; logistics challenges, high transactions costs; 
exposure to natural disasters; lack of reliable data to ensure services reach the most 
vulnerable; and limited human and financial capacities within PICTs. The programme 
will adopt a mix of national and direct execution modalities.
29. With the significant decrease in core resources, some needs of the PICTs and the 
effective delivery of transformative results are at risk. In this regard, the Pacific 
Subregional Office will prioritize up to eight countries, and incorporate staffing and 
operational costs in all new non-core agreements. UNFPA will intensify advocacy for 
greater investment in its programmes to ensure stronger ownership and sustainability 
and engage a broader range of donors, including regional and global financing 
mechanisms such as those for climate resilience. Furthermore, a systematic analysis of 
the tasks and functions required to deliver the programme will be undertaken to delivery, data analysis, monitoring and accountability.
31. The United Nations system, including the United Nations Junior Professional 
Officer programme in seven countries and the two United Nations country teams in 
Fiji and Samoa, will ensure continued coordination with governments as part of the 
United Nations Pacific Strategy (2018-2022) and improve United Nations agency 
coherence based on collaborative advantages on the implementation of the sixth
subregional programme.
32. Emergency preparedness, response and disaster risk reduction approaches are 
mainstreamed across programme sectors, focusing on enhancing resilience of social 
service systems and communities.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. The Pacific Subregional Office has a modest, but strategic presence in the 
region. Eleven staff are located in key PICTs and together with the team in Fiji provide
policy guidance to 14 PICTs and technical guidance and programme support to eight
PICTs. 
34. A monitoring and evaluation plan aligned to the United Nations Pacific Strategy 
Results Framework has been developed. UNFPA will work with partners to: (a) 
conduct annual programme reviews; (b) support baseline and end line surveys and data 
collection, including an “evaluability study” of the sixth subregional programme; (c)
lead the United Nations country teams efforts to maintain an International Conference 
on Population and Development/Sustainable Development Goals/United Nations 
Pacific Strategy indicator database; (d) plan for thematic evaluations where substantial 
non-core resources are mobilized; (e) conduct mid-term review in 2020 to inform 
priorities and strategies for the remainder of the programme cycle; and (f) initiate a 
comprehensive programme evaluation at the end of fourth year of the sixth cycle.
35. In collaboration with key partners, UNFPA will support regular census processes 
and surveys as a critical foundation for evidence-based planning, monitoring and 
evaluation of development and humanitarian support. UNFPA will continue to play a 
key role as chair of the United Nations Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Group.Regional priority: Sustainable development that combines economic, social and cultural development in ways that improve livelihoods and well-being and use the environment 
sustainably
United Nations Pacific Strategy Outcome: By 2022, more people in the Pacific, particularly the most vulnerable have increased equitable access to and utilization of inclusive, 
resilient and quality basic services
Indicators: Number of PICTs in which at least skilled health personnel attend 95 per cent of births. Number of PICTs whose proportion of women of reproductive age who have 
their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods has increased based on the latest available data
UNFPA strategic plan 
outcome
Country programme 
outputs Output indicators, baselines and targets Partner contributions
Indicative 
resources
Outcome 1: Sexual and 
reproductive health 
Outcome indicators:
 Number of countries whose 
proportion of women of 
reproductive age (aged 15-49) 
who have their need for family 
planning satisfied with modern 
methods is >76%
Baseline: 1; Target: 5
 Number of countries with health 
facilities providing at least three 
integrated sexual and 
reproductive health services
Baseline: 0; Target: 5 
 Number of countries with 
adolescent birth rates less 
than 34 per 1,000 women 
aged 15-19 years
Baseline: 1; Target: 7
 Number of countries with at 
least 95% of births attended 
by skilled birth attendants
Baseline: 2; Target: 7
Output 1: Strengthened 
access to quality 
integrated sexual and 
reproductive health 
services for women, 
adolescents and youth, 
across the development 
humanitarian nexus
 Number of countries implementing a sustainability strategy 
for Reproductive Health Commodity Services.
Baseline: 0; Target: 7
 Number of countries that utilized family planning unmet 
need review findings to inform family planning costed 
implementation plans. Baseline 0; Target: 7
 Number of countries with national guidelines for delivering 
youth-friendly sexual and reproductive health services,
according to international standards. Baseline: 0; Target: 5
 Number of countries that have the capacity to implement the 
Minimum Initial Service Package at the onset of crises.
Baseline: 3; Target: 7
 Number of countries with cervical cancer policy and guidelines.
Baseline: 1; Target: 5
 Number of countries with established national systems for the 
Maternal Death Surveillance and Response.
Baseline: 2; Target: 6
Pacific Community; 
Pacific Islands Forum 
Secretariat; Statistics 
Offices; Ministries of 
Health; World Health 
Organization; other 
United Nations 
organizations
$11.5 million 
($2.7 million 
from regular 
resources and 
$8.8 million 
from other 
resources)
Output 2: Increased 
national capacity to design 
and implement community 
and school based family 
life education programmes 
that promote human rights 
and gender equality
 Number of countries that have aligned family life 
education curricula to international standards. 
Baseline: 0; Target: 5 
 Number of countries that have a standardized community 
based training package for marginalized adolescents and 
youth. 
Baseline: 0; Target: 5
Pacific Community; 
Statistics Offices;
Ministries of 
Education; United 
Nations agencies;
International Planned 
Parenthood 
Federation; National 
Youth Councils
$3.2 million 
($0.5 million 
from regular 
resources and 
$2.7 million 
from other 
resources)
Regional Priority: Gender equality and empowerment of women. 
United Nations Pacific Strategy outcome: By 2022, gender equality is advanced in PICTs, where more women and girls are empowered and enjoy equal opportunities and 
treatment in social, economic and political spheres, contribute to and benefit from national development, and live a life free from violence and discrimination. 
Indicator: Intimate partner violence against women prevalence rate; non-intimate violence against women prevalence rate 
Outcome 3: Gender equality and 
women’s empowerment 
Outcome indicators:
Number of PICTs with gender equality 
national action plans that integrate 
Output 1: Increased national 
capacity to address and promote 
gender equality and the 
empowerment of women and girls, 
including their reproductive rights 
and need for ending violence 
 Reproductive rights of women and violence 
against women reflected in at least two
national policy documents in three 
selected PICTs. Baseline: 0; Target: 3
Ministries of: Women;
International Planned 
Parenthood 
Federation; civil 
society organizations;
United Nations 
$1.5 million 
($0.5 million 
from regular 
resources and 
$1.0 million 
from other and national budget allocations 
Baseline: 2; Target: 5
Output 2: Strengthened integration 
of violence against women in the 
national health sector
 Number of countries implementing at least 30 
percent of the national violence against 
women study health recommendations 
Baseline: 0; Target: 3
 Number of countries with standard operating 
guidelines for responding to violence against 
women.
Baseline: 0; Target: 4
 Percentage of health facilities per country 
making referrals to multisectoral services
Baseline: 0; Target: 60% 
Ministries of Health;
Auckland University 
of Technology; civil 
society organizations;
United Nations 
organizations
$3.8 million 
($1.5 million 
from regular 
resources and 
$2.3 million 
from other 
resources)
Regional Priority: Good Governance
United Nations Pacific Strategy Outcome: By 2022, people and communities in the Pacific will contribute to and benefit from inclusive, informed and transparent decisionmaking processes; accountable and responsive institutions; and improved access to justice
Indicator: Number of PICTs that have conducted at least one population and housing census in the last 10 years
Outcome 4: Population dynamics 
Outcome indicators:
 Number of countries with national 
development framework and 
policies that incorporate 
ICPD/SDG and population 
dynamics and address the needs 
of women, girls and young people 
Baseline: 0; Target: 8
 Number of countries that have
policies and plans adopted and 
resourced to address (a) sexual
reproductive health and (b) 
violence against women. 
Baseline: 0; Target: 4
Output 1: Strengthened national 
statistical systems to ensure 
increased availability, analysis and 
utilization of quality: disaggregated 
ICPD/SDG-related data, with a 
focus on informing national and 
sectoral priorities, policies and 
programming in development and 
humanitarian situations
 Number of countries with at least one 
analytical study available linking population 
data to sexual and reproductive health, youth 
and violence against women. 
Baseline: 2; Target: 5
 Number of countries with health information 
systems monitoring key ICPD/SDG 
indicators. 
Baseline:0; Target: 5
 Number of countries monitoring Sustainable 
Development Goals indicators related to the 
United Nations Pacific Strategy
Baseline: 0; Target: 14
Pacific Community;
Statistics Offices;
Ministries of 
Education; United 
Nations organizations
$5.5 million 
($1.3 million 
from regular 
resources and 
$4.2 million 
from other 
resources)
Output 2: Strengthened use of 
demographic intelligence to 
improve policies, programmes and 
advocacy
 Number of countries that have developed 
advocacy and policy briefs in ICPD/SDGrelated areas. 
Baseline: 0; Target: 10
United Nations 
organizations;
International Planned 
Parenthood 
Federation;
parliamentarians
$3.8 million 
($0.4 million 
from regular 
resources and 
$3.4 million 
from other 
resources)
__________