File Name: TTO-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Trinidad & Tobago
Country Code: TTO
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January–4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
30 November 2021
Original: English
2117648X (E) 021221
First regular session 2022
31 January–4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Trinidad and Tobago
(2022–2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework… 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 5
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 6
Annex
Results and resources framework for Trinidad and Tobago (2022-2026)…………………………… 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Multi-country Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework
1. The economy of Trinidad and Tobago has grown substantially since its independence 
in 1962. Having invested heavily in its human capital, Trinidad and Tobago was classified as 
a high human development country in the 2020 Human Development Report, ranking 67 of 
189 countries and territories. Trinidad and Tobago has been considered a leader in the 
Caribbean region in terms of its economic strength and its levels of socioeconomic 
development. The neonatal mortality rate is among the lowest in the region at 6.5 per 1,000 
live births. Literacy rates are high at 99 per cent, with 65 per cent participation in tertiary 
education and female participation at just under 70 per cent. While there remain gaps in 
gender equality, women play an important role in public life, comprising 26 per cent of the 
lower house and 40 per cent of the senate, and the Speakers of both houses and the Clerk of 
Parliament are women. 
2. Trinidad and Tobago has been an example of electoral democracy, convening elections 
as provided for in the Constitution with the will of the people being respected. Improving 
accountability and transparency, public sector efficiency and the administration of justice 
remain issues of national attention. 
3. The economy of Trinidad and Tobago is largely driven by the oil and gas sector which 
accounts for over 30 per cent of the gross domestic product and 80 per cent of the country’s
exports. Like other oil- and gas-based economies, Trinidad and Tobago is vulnerable to 
exogenous shocks and volatility in the global energy market. As a result of the uncertainties 
caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the Government has placed 
renewed focus on diversification and digitalization of the economy to strengthen resilience 
to all forms of shocks and to enhance the country’s growth potential, particularly in the nonenergy sector. 
4. Historically, Trinidad and Tobago has prioritized investments in its social protection 
system and protecting the vulnerable has been one of the central pillars of government policy. 
The social protection system has been generous and contributed greatly to the country’s
progress. During the pandemic, the Government scaled up its social protection programmes, 
revealing some gaps in coverage and duplication in the provision of support. 
5. Public safety and citizen security in Trinidad and Tobago are also priorities for the 
Government as the country suffers from gang-related violence, high levels of gender-based
violence and trafficking. As a result, the Government is implementing initiatives to 
strengthen prevention through programmes to support at-risk youth and change gender 
stereotypes, while also improving the criminal justice system and services for survivors of 
violence against women. 
6. As a small island developing State, Trinidad and Tobago has been acutely vulnerable to 
shocks from natural hazards, which have been increasing in intensity and frequency due to 
the climate crisis. These include frequent flooding, landslides, rising sea levels and coastal 
erosion. Hence, there is a need to match climate mitigation measures with investments to 
build resilience to climate events.
7. The Sustainable Development Goals have been made a policy priority in Trinidad and 
Tobago. More specifically, the country’s national development plan, Vision 2030, is directly 
aligned (81 per cent) with the Goals. Consistent with this is the country’s ongoing 
commitment to meet international climate obligations. As a signatory to the Paris Agreement, 
Trinidad and Tobago was one of the first countries in the Caribbean to submit its nationally 
determined contribution and has been working with UNDP on a range of activities to meet 
its obligations.
8. In the other islands served by the UNDP office in Trinidad and Tobago, issues of climate 
change, implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and digitalization remain high 
lidbiihbild il iiiDP/DCP/TTO/4
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics; in Sint Maarten, UNDP is strengthening 
national early warning and recovery capacities; and UNDP is supporting national 
digitalization efforts in Curaçao. 
9. Against this background, the UNDP office in Trinidad and Tobago plays an important 
role in supporting these islands to achieve national priorities through the technical assistance 
it provides and its role as convenor of critical partnerships. UNDP has adopted an issuesbased, multidimensional approach which has also benefited from South-South cooperation 
across all areas of programming. Gender equality and women’s empowerment are 
mainstreamed throughout UNDP efforts and will be further strengthened in the proposed
country programme. Projects supporting the most vulnerable segments of the population, 
such as persons with disabilities, at-risk youth and the socially displaced, will continue to be 
core focuses of this country programme and are consistent with national development goals
focused on leaving no one behind.
10. Trinidad and Tobago is a net contributing country to UNDP and has been successful at 
mobilizing third-party cost sharing from a range of partners. Trinidad and Tobago is a 
recipient of funding from global instruments such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF) 
and the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol. Trinidad and 
Tobago participates in the UNDP Nationally Determined Contribution Support Programme,
its Climate Promise and its COVID-19 relief funding, and hosts one of the 91 UNDP 
Accelerator Labs. The Government of Trinidad and Tobago also provides cost sharing to 
UNDP to support initiatives in the areas of crime prevention and COVID-19 health response. 
One of the largest UNDP partners in the region is the European Union.
11. UNDP continuously draws on lessons learned from previous country programme 
implementation based on the country programme performance summary.1 Reflecting on these 
important contributions, UNDP plans to streamline its efforts in collaboration with United 
Nations entities such as the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the United 
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to share 
resources and enhance the impact on priority issues, such as supporting at-risk communities 
and advancing gender equality. The success of UNDP programming demonstrates a need for 
further strengthening the organization’s multidimensional, holistic approach to programming 
to improve delivery on complex issues, including research, monitoring and assessments that 
inform ongoing and future programming. Furthering the long-standing relationships of 
UNDP with the Governments of Aruba, Curaçao, Sint Maarten and Trinidad and Tobago and 
local actors on technical issues will continue to facilitate quick, meaningful and agile 
responses to unforeseen needs. Finally, UNDP will expand its internal capacity on 
information and communications, innovation and gender mainstreaming to propel their 
integration into all aspects of UNDP functioning. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
12. UNDP aims to contribute to the ultimate goal of improving the lives of all people living 
in Trinidad and Tobago through supporting efforts towards achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals by building a more equitable, resilient and safe society. UNDP is well 
positioned to be an effective partner for the countries it serves as they address complex 
development challenges. Aligned with its Strategic Plan, 2022-2025 and signature solutions, 
the UNDP programme will support Governments to achieve their national development goals 
as aligned with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the United Nations Multicountry Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNMSDCF) and global 
agreements such as the Small Island Developing States Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the Paris 
Agreement on Climate Change.
__________________
1 Th
d dtthbf ltd iddt t13. The UNDP approach for this country programme is to: provide technical support for 
localizing the Sustainable Development Goals while continuing to build on areas of strength;
deepen partnerships with national counterparts and other development actors; and increase 
efforts to expand and diversify funding sources. This will be achieved by UNDP 
accompanying the Government in systemic change through structural transformation and
building resilience, while maximizing digitalization and strategic innovation. 
14. UNDP Trinidad and Tobago will focus on four key priority areas, which will inform the 
national and regional actions of the United Nations system and its partners over the next five 
years. 
15. Trinidad and Tobago, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten will have progressed in their 
transition towards building more inclusive and resilient economies and shared prosperity with 
UNDP support for evidence-based policymaking and programmes. This includes supporting 
national dialogues, bringing research and best practices to national policy processes by 
engaging policymakers, parliamentarians and academics as they seek to adopt sustainable 
development solutions that are risk-informed and in line with global commitments, especially 
the Paris Agreement. Particular emphasis will be placed on supporting national efforts to 
accelerate the adoption of renewable energy, improve energy efficiency in cooling 
mechanisms, increase climate ambition and achieve nationally determined contribution 
targets. UNDP will support national efforts for building capacities for research, science and 
technology and the adoption of digital strategies and solutions, all critical to facilitate the 
transition towards a more diversified, sustainable and resilient development pathway.
16. In Trinidad and Tobago, UNDP will work closely with partners such as the Ministry of 
Planning and Development to encourage the enhancement of productive and competitive 
ecosystems that boosts employment and hence standards of living through structural 
transformation of the economy, putting the most vulnerable (particularly women and youth)
at the centre of the economic policies and engaging the private sector. UNDP will also 
collaborate with the Ministry of Energy, the GEF and Montreal Protocol Project Units and 
the private sector to meet the countries’ carbon reduction targets and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. In Aruba, UNDP will work closely with the Ministry of Finance and the University 
of Aruba to build national capacities for a resilient future economy. 
17. People in Trinidad and Tobago and Sint Maarten will have more equitable access to and 
utilize universal, quality and shock-responsive social protection, educational, health and care 
services with support from UNDP to strengthen national capacities to provide inclusive social 
protection and strong health system response, and to provide opportunities for youth to fulfil 
their potential. Equality and well-being of all citizens are central to ensuring long-lasting 
sustainable development impacts. UNDP sets out to support the Governments’ abilities to 
develop evidence-based policies and processes that provide equitable access to quality social 
services to empower all. UNDP is committed to ensuring that social protection systems are 
gender-responsive and inclusive.
18. In Trinidad and Tobago, UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Social Development 
and Family Services, the Ministry of National Security, UNICEF and UN-Women to 
strengthen effective and shock-responsive social protection systems and enhance 
opportunities for young people. In particular, UNDP will collaborate with the Government 
to establish its first social registry, which will improve targeting and efficiency within the 
system. UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Health and the Pan American Health 
Organization to facilitate an effective and responsive health system. In Sint Maarten, UNDP 
will work with the Ministry of Kingdom Affairs to build resilient systems to ensure food 
security for those impacted by shocks and crises.
19. People, communities and institutions in Trinidad and Tobago and Sint Maarten will have 
enhanced adaptive capacities for inclusive, gender-responsive disaster risk management and 
climate change adaptation and mitigation with UNDP support for improvements in the 
management of the environment and natural resources, and in national capacities for disaster DP/DCP/TTO/4
resilience to climatic events through the strengthening of national and community-level early 
warning systems. South-South partnerships with Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines will be leveraged to ensure inclusive, gender-sensitive 
approaches. 
20. UNDP will work in collaboration with the Trinidad and Tobago Office of Disaster 
Preparedness and Management to strengthen national and community flood early warning 
systems. In Sint Maarten, UNDP will support government efforts to employ early warning 
alarms and strengthen early warning capacity. In Trinidad and Tobago, UNDP will support 
the efforts of the Ministry of Planning and Development to improve natural resource 
management including investing in research and data to improve pollinator management. 
UNDP will work with the GEF Small Grants Programme to develop innovative, inclusive 
partnerships to tackle environmental issues on land and sea, employing solutions that address
overexploitation, pollution and waste management.
21. Regional and national laws, policies, systems and institutions will be enhanced, which 
should result in improved access to justice and promote peace, social cohesion and security
with UNDP contributing to the development of an enabling environment that improves access 
to justice and strengthens citizen security, as well as addressing the underlying conditions 
that make societies vulnerable to violence and crime. It will do this through projects that 
target at-risk youth, including those who are incarcerated, particularly girls. 
22. To address these challenges, UNDP will collaborate with the Office of the Prime 
Minister (Gender and Child Affairs) in Trinidad and Tobago, the judiciary, the Ministry of 
National Security and the Ministry of the Attorney General and Legal Affairs to build an 
enabling environment where laws, policies, systems and institutions improve access to justice 
and strengthen citizen security through support for rule-of-law institutions. Citizen security 
will also be strengthened by initiatives such as the joint European Union-United Nations 
Spotlight initiative, undertaken in partnership with UNDP, UNICEF, the United Nations 
Population Fund and UN-Women, and which focuses on strengthening institutional responses 
to gender-based violence.
III. Programme and risk management
23. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. 
24. This document was formulated by the UNDP country office team, employing a 
consultative process with representatives from government partners and other key 
stakeholders. It was designed to contribute directly to the UNMSDCF 2022-2026, which was 
similarly developed through consultations with Governments, regional organizations, 
international development partners, civil society and the private sector. The UNMSDCF 
identifies common strategic priorities to leverage regional synergies and adopt collective 
approaches.
25. UNDP will continue to partner with the government ministries that are coordinating and 
executing national development strategies. For this reason, a coordination mechanism, 
chaired by the Ministry of Planning and Development and comprised of senior officials 
across key ministries, will optimize synergies associated with cross-disciplinary oversight 
and ensure that UNDP technical support is aligned with national priorities and objectives.
26. UNDP will support national implementation by incorporating capacity-building of 
government institutions. Results-based management techniques underpinning programme 
implementation will be utilized by project management boards established for each project. 
27. The programme will incorporate the voices of communities, particularly those facing 
vulnerabilities, into project design and decision-making. Quality assurance mechanisms will 
ensure that the perspectives and needs of vulnerable groups are effectively incorporated into 28. An issues-based, multidimensional approach guided the design of the country 
programme. First, interventions and outputs in one work area contribute to others. For 
example, enhancing the well-being and opportunities for youth addresses equality issues 
(outcome area 2) while also contributing to the reduction of crime and violence (outcome 
area 4). Second, specific interventions (innovation or digitalization) are relevant across 
several work areas. Third, within a given work area, this programme seeks complementarity 
among programming mechanisms (such as combining research findings with technical 
support, policy advocacy and community action). In addition, a networked implementation 
style targeting greater coordination among UNDP projects, as well as increased collaboration 
with national development actors and United Nations agencies, should strengthen vertical 
and horizontal policy coherence. 
29. The country programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution 
may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to 
force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
30. For the successful implementation of the programme, different types of risks –
programming, social and environmental safeguards, physical and operational – must be 
considered.
31. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with respect 
to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and operations 
policies and procedures and internal control framework. UNDP will also employ its 
enterprise risk management policy to create a risk management culture throughout the 
country office in all spheres of activity from the project design stage and throughout project 
implementation. 
32. This country programme is based on the assumption that cost-sharing contributions from 
government and external partners will continue to be strong despite volatility in the global 
economy caused by COVID-19. To offset this risk, UNDP will expand its dialogue with 
external donors and seek to assist the Government of Trinidad and Tobago, in particular to
benefit from expanding climate finance facilities.
33. Hydro-meteorological and seismic events pose a physical risk in Trinidad and Tobago. 
UNDP implements business continuity testing to strengthen risk resilience and flexibility for 
internal operations and external programme execution. UNDP will continue to provide strong 
support as part of the United Nations Emergency Technical Team, which works with the 
Office of Disaster Preparedness and Management, monitoring responses to early warning 
mechanisms and standing ready to mobilize technical assistance and resources in the event 
of a national emergency (including as part of programmatic disaster risk reduction 
interventions). 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
34. Monitoring and evaluation are essential elements of good programme management. 
Project evaluations will inform strategic assessments, such as the midterm review and final 
evaluation of the country programme. UNDP will ensure that monitoring and evaluation 
results will improve planning and decision-making and include using the UNDP gender 
marker to monitor country programme expenditures. The country office will continue to 
strengthen its monitoring and evaluation capacity and build the capacities of national 
institutions to generate data and information that improve development effectiveness and 
programming opportunities. Specifically, UNDP will ensure compliance with project-level 
monitoring and evaluation requirements including quality assurance assessment during 
implementation, updating the risk logs and gender markers and ensuring that independent 
terminal evaluations are conductedDP/DCP/TTO/4
35. All evaluation activities will follow the UNDP evaluation policy and United Nations 
Evaluation Group guidelines and principles. In a net contributor country context, the 
expanded function of monitoring and evaluation as a developmental tool in its own right adds 
significant value for UNDP. 
36. UNDP will continue to support the generation of disaggregated data (by gender, 
ethnicity, age, disability, rural/urban, etc.) to offer better quality data to support evidencebased decision-making within the Ministry of Planning and Development when addressing
issues related to multidimensional poverty and well-being. 
37. Knowledge management (including research) is an integral component of UNDP efforts. 
UNDP will harness the knowledge generated through research and technical support into new 
electronic and print products in collaboration with academic partners such as the University 
of the West Indies and the University of Trinidad and Tobago. Programming opportunities 
may emerge from outcome evaluations or comprehensive monitoring and evaluation services. 
The development dialogues will be an effective mechanism for knowledge dissemination, 
exchange and stakeholder engagement. Moreover, government counterparts recognize the 
value added by accessing the experiences of other country offices.Annex. Results and resources framework for Trinidad and Tobago (2022-2026)2
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Economic Resilience and Shared Prosperity, Sustainable Development Goals 9, 7 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: Outcome 2: The Caribbean has fully transitioned to a more diversified and 
sustainable economy that supports inclusive and resilient economic growth.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities
Indicative country programme 
outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners / partnerships
frameworks
Estimated cost by 
outcome ($)
IRRF3: 1.1.1 Number of countries 
that have development plans and 
budgets that integrate 
intergovernmentally-agreed 
frameworks across the whole-ofgovernment (2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, Paris 
Agreement, Beijing Declaration and 
Platform for Action, SAMOA 
Pathway, Montreal Protocol, Kigali 
Amendment)
Baseline:
(a) Trinidad and Tobago: 2 
(integration in progress)
(b) Aruba: 2 (integration in 
progress)
(c) Curaçao: 1 (integration 
started)
(d) Sint Maarten: 1
(integration started)
Target: 
(a) 3 (almost complete)
(b) 3 (almost complete)
(c) 2 (integration in progress) 
(d) 2 (integration in progress)
IRRF. 5.2.1 Megawatts by installed 
renewable energy solar capacity 
• Ministry of Planning and 
Development
• Ministry of Energy and Energy 
Industries
• Central Statistical Office (Aruba, 
Curaçao)
1.1 Policymakers, 
parliamentarians and academics 
improve their capacity to develop 
evidence-based, gender-responsive 
COVID-19 recovery policies to 
build a resilient, inclusive 
economy
I.1.1: Number of UNDP-supported 
research and policy dialogues on 
socioeconomic and climate-related 
policy options and best practices
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2025): 12 dialogues, 3 
analytical papers
Source, frequency: UNDP, 
semi-annually
1.2 Support government agencies’ 
implementation of inclusive digital 
strategies and solutions 
I.1.2: Level of progress in the 
development of a national digital 
strategy implemented
Baseline: 0
Target: Drafted
Source: UNDP, annual 
Government agencies
• Ministry of Planning and 
Development
• Ministry of Energy
• The Parliament of Trinidad 
and Tobago
• Ministry of Digital 
Transformation
• Ministry of Finance (Aruba)
• University of Aruba
• Ministry of Kingdom Affairs, 
Sint Maarten
• Ministry of General Affairs 
(Office of the Prime Minister) 
Curaçao
Civil society
• Air Conditioning and 
Refrigeration Industry 
Association
• University of the West Indies
Development partners
• GEF
• European Union
Frameworks
Regular $137,000
Other $11,970,000
__________________
2 All references are Trinidad and Tobago unless otherwise indicated.
3 UNDP integrated results and resources frameworkDP/DCP/TTO/4
Baseline: 0
Target: 80 MW
IRRF.E.1.2: Number of public 
institutions that leverage digital 
technologies in ways that improve 
people’s lives at the national level
Baseline: 5
Target: 7
1.3 Government of Trinidad and 
Tobago policies, laws and 
regulations in place for the 
adoption of green transition in line 
with national climate 
commitments
I.1.3a: Level of progress in the 
design of policies and laws and 
regulations for the adoption of 
renewable energies and electric 
vehicles
Baseline: started
Target: drafted
Source: Ministry of 
Planning and 
Development, annual 
I.1.3b: Number of national policies, 
regulatory and institutional 
frameworks developed or amended 
to incorporate energy efficiency for 
refrigeration and air-conditioning 
sector.
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3 
Source: Ministry of 
Planning and 
Development, annual
I.1.3c: Number of community-based 
sites running on solar power 
Baseline: 0
Target: 8 
Source: UNDP, annual 
I.1.3d: Number of large-scale 
energy-efficient technologies 
implemented within the refrigeration 
and air-conditioning sector.
Baseline: 0 
Target: 2 
• Sendai Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction
• United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate 
Change/ Paris Agreement
• Montreal Protocol
• Kigali AmendmentSource: GEF, Ministry of 
Planning and 
Development, annual
I.1.3e: Percentage of HCFC
consumption decreased from the 
2013 baseline.
Baseline: 37.5% reduction 
Target: 65.5% reduction
Source: Ministry of 
Energy and Energy 
Industries 
1.4 Human capital strengthened 
through investments in research, 
science and technology to achieve 
higher levels of economic 
productivity and innovation.
I.1.4: Level of progress in 
developing a science, technology 
and engineering research and 
training centre (equipped)
(Aruba)
Baseline: plans prepared
Target: implemented 
Source: UNDP, annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Equality and Well-being; Sustainable Development Goals 3, 10 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2: Outcome 4: People in the Caribbean equitably access and utilize universal, quality 
and shock-responsive, social protection, educational, health and care services.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
IRRF.1.2.1 Rating of policy 
measures and institutional capacities 
in place to increase access to social 
protection schemes targeting
(women, urban poor, rural poor, 
persons with disabilities, informal 
sector workers)
Baseline:
• Ministry of Social Development and 
Family Services, annually
• Ministry of Finance, Social Sector 
Investment Programme, annually
• Central statistical offices in all 
countries 
• National Insurance Board 
2.1 National partners and 
stakeholders have improved 
capacities to provide social 
protection and social inclusion 
I.2.1a: Percentage of progress in 
developing a detailed map or 
database of all social protection 
Government agencies
• Ministry of Social 
Development and Family 
Services 
• Ministry of Planning and 
Development
• Ministry of Health
• Ministry of Finance 
Regular $137,000
Other $555,000DP/DCP/TTO/4
(a) Trinidad and Tobago 
rating 2 (work in progress)
(b) Curaçao rating 1 (work 
started) 
(c) Aruba rating 1 (work 
started)
(d) Sint Maarten rating 1
(work started)
Target: 
(a) rating 3 (work almost 
complete)
(b) rating 1 (work started) 
(c) rating 2 (work in progress)
(d) rating 2 (work in progress)
IRRF.1.2.2 Rating in countries that 
have increased types and quality of 
social protection services (type of 
services, quality of services, 
coverage, adequacy, access)
4
Baseline: Trinidad and Tobago 
Rating 1 (Low)
Target: Rating 3 (high)
IRRF.1.3.1 Percentage and number
of people accessing basic services
(sex-disaggregated data, the poor 
(income measure), informal sector 
workers, youth, persons with 
disabilities, displaced populations, 
ethnic minorities)
Baseline: Trinidad and Tobago 11% 
(156,240)5
Target: 14% (200,000)
IRRF.4.2.2: Number of families with 
enhanced resilience of food due to 
public resources
Baseline: Trinidad and Tobago: 750
programmes in Trinidad and Tobago 
developed
Baseline: 10% 
Target: 100%
Source: (1) Ministry of 
Social Development and 
Family Services, annual
(2) Ministry of Planning 
and Development, annual
I.2.1b: Number of social protection 
programmes improved and digitized 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Data Source: Ministry of 
Social Development and 
Family Services, annual 
I.2.1c: Number of food bank 
systems institutionalized to improve 
food security (Sint Maarten)
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Source: Government of 
Sint Maarten (twice a 
year) 
2.3 The health system has stronger 
capacity to respond to the 
COVID-19 pandemic
I.2.3: Number of health centres, 
hospitals, and other health 
institutions benefiting from medical 
supplies and equipment procured to 
support COVID-19 response 
Baseline: 0
Target: 10
• Ministry of Kingdom Affairs, 
Sint Maarten
United Nations agencies
• UNICEF
• PAHO
• UN-Women
Development partners
• European Union
• Resembid 
• Civil society 
__________________
4 Senior Citizens Grant, Disability Assistance Grant, Public Assistance Grant, Food Support Programme, National Insurance Grants
5 Disaggregated data not available.Target: 2700 Source: Ministry of 
Health, (twice a year) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Resilience to climate change and natural resources management; Sustainable Development Goals 13, 7 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3: Outcome 5: Caribbean people, communities and institutions have enhanced their 
adaptive capacity for inclusive, gender-responsive Disaster Risk Management and climate change adaptation and mitigation
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
IRRF.3.1.1: Number of national 
disaster risk reduction strategies 
developed in line with the Sendai 
Framework
Baseline: Trinidad and Tobago: 0
Target: 2
IRRF. 3.1.2 Number and rating of 
early warning and preparedness 
measures in place to manage the 
impact of conflicts, disasters, 
pandemics and other shocks
Baseline:
(a) Trinidad and Tobago: 1; Rating 1 
(work started)
(b) Sint Maarten: 0; Rating 0 (not in 
place)
Target:
(a) Trinidad and Tobago: 1 – Rating
4 (in place)
(b) Sint Maarten 1: Rating 1 (work 
started)
▪ Ministry of National Security 
▪ Ministry of Planning and 
Development
▪ Ministry of Kingdom Affairs, Sint 
Maarten
3.1 National and community 
capacities and processes are 
enhanced in disaster risk 
reduction, response and recovery 
I.3.1a: Number of national 
coordination mechanisms with 
capacities strengthened for flood 
early warning 
Baseline: 0
Target: 1 
Source: community flood 
early warning systems, 
annual 
I.3.1b: Number of community-level 
systems with capacities strengthened 
for flood early warning 
Baseline: 0
Target: 7 
Source: Community Flood 
Early Warning Systems, 
annual 
3.2 Governments improve their 
environment and natural resource 
management
I.3.2a: Percentage of supported 
innovative, inclusive and scalable 
initiatives that foster multistakeholder partnerships at the local 
level to tackle global environmental 
Government agencies
• Ministry of National Security 
Office of Disaster 
Preparedness and Management 
• Ministry of Rural Development 
and Local Government
• Ministry of Planning and 
Development
Regional and national organizations
• Caribbean Disaster Emergency 
Management Agency
United Nations agencies
• United Nations Office for 
Disaster Risk Reduction
• United Nations Environment 
Programme
Development partner
• GEF Small Grants Programme
International organizations
• International Federation 
of Red Cross and Red 
Crescent Societies
Regular $137,000
Other $3,740,000DP/DCP/TTO/4
issues in priority landscapes and 
seascapes. 
Baseline: 20%
Target: 70% of grants 
foster multi-stakeholder 
partnerships
Source: GEF Small Grants 
Programme, annual 
I.3.2b: Number of pieces of research 
completed and policies or legislation 
supported to improve pollination and 
pollinator management through 
enriched data, public awareness and 
pollinator-appropriate management.
Baseline: 0
Target: 4 research; 2 
policies or legislation
Source: Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services 
Network, annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Peace, Safety, Justice and Rule of Law; Sustainable Development Goals 16, 5 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4: Outcome 7: Regional and national laws, policies, systems and institutions improve 
access to justice and promote peace, social cohesion and security
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
IRRF. 6.3.3 Number of entities with 
strengthened capacities to implement 
legislation, policies, action plans and 
initiatives to prevent gender-based 
violence (national entities, 
subnational entities, CSOs, the 
private sector)
Baseline: Trinidad and Tobago 3
Target: 5
IRRF. 2.2.3 Number and proportion
of people supported, who have 
access to justice (gender, youth, the 
poor (income measure), persons with 
• Office of the Prime Minister, Gender 
and Child Affairs Division, Central 
Registry on Domestic Violence Data 
Report, annual
• Trinidad and Tobago Police Service, 
(Crime and Problem Analysis 
Branch), annually
• Judiciary (Family Court and Juvenile 
Court) records, annual
• Ministry of the Attorney General and 
Legal Affairs
4.1 State and non-State actors 
improve their support of the 
prevention of and response to 
gender-based violence
I.4.1a: Number of State and nonState actors whose capabilities were 
enhanced to formulate and deliver 
effective services and prevention 
approaches for gender-based 
violence.
Baseline: 2
Target: 7 civil society 
organizations; 2 State 
actors 
Government agencies
• Office of the Prime Minister 
Gender and Child Affairs
• Ministry of National Security
• Trinidad and Tobago Police 
Service 
• The Judiciary
• Ministry of the Attorney 
General and Legal Affairs
• National and regional courts
• Prisons
Global and bilateral organizations
• European Union
Regular $138,000
Other $1,950,000disabilities, displaced populations, 
ethnic minorities)
Baseline: 827 matters for 2019/2020 
(for Trinidad and Tobago )
6
Target: 1,000 matters and 
disaggregated (for Trinidad and 
Tobago )
Source: Spotlight 
Initiative, annual
I.4.1b: Number of communications 
or outreach activities conducted on 
gender-based violence at the 
community level. 
Baseline: 0
Target: 7
Data Source: 
Implementing CSO 
reports, annual
4.2 Police, prosecutors and 
courts improve access to 
justice by more effectively 
and efficiently managing 
criminal cases. 
I.4.2a: Level of progress towards the 
improved capacity of police, 
prosecutors and courts.
Baseline: beginning
Target: halfway
Source: National Courts, 
annual
I.4.2b: Number of forensic 
pathologists in the Trinidad and 
Tobago Forensic Science Centre to 
expand the country’s capacity to 
conduct forensic examinations on a 
timely basis. 
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Source: UNDP, annual
4.3 Rule of law institutions 
supported to strengthen citizen 
security 
• United States Embassy
• United Kingdom High 
Commission 
United Nations agencies
• United Nations Regional 
Centre for Peace, Disarmament 
and Development in Latin 
America and the Caribbean
• UN-Women
• UNFPA
__________________
6 Disaggregated data not available.DP/DCP/TTO/4
I.4.3a: Percentage of at-risk youth in 
prison who participated in 
sustainable capacity development 
activities intended to support youth 
to make targeted, purposeful 
decisions to contribute meaningfully
to society. Data disaggregated by 
gender. 
Baseline: 10%
Target: 50% boys and 
50% girls at Youth 
Transformation and 
Rehabilitation Centre 
Source: Prisons, annual
I.4.3b: Percentage of prison staff 
trained in best management 
practices and/or restorative justice. 
Data disaggregated by gender.
Baseline: 10
Target: 70% (total and by 
gender)
Source, frequency: 
Ministry of National 
Security, annual
4.4. Youth well-being and 
opportunities are enhanced
I.4.4: Number of practitioners in 
capacity-building activities, 
disaggregated by gender and other 
marginalized groups.
Baseline: 10
Target: 30
Source: Prison Authority, police, Ministry of Youth 
Development and National 
Service, annual