File Name: TUN-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Tunisia
Country Code: TUN
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1–4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
3 December 2020
Original: English
2016302X (E) 081220
First regular session 2021
1–4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Tunisia (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management…………………………………………………. .......……….… 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
Annex
Results and resources framework for Tunisia (2021–2025)………………………………………… 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
1. Tunisia, a middle-income country, has made substantial progress, in the wake of the 2011 
revolution, in consolidating the democratic system consecrated in its 2014 Constitution.
Nonetheless, the transition is vulnerable to challenges and growing social tensions.
1
2. This country programme document is nested within the theory of change of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025, for Tunisia, which seeks to 
consolidate trust in communities and institutions, bolstering social cohesion and equity. 
Strengthening inclusion and resilience to socio-economic, security-related and environmental
shocks (including pandemics) is cross-cutting. UNDP is the largest United Nations organization, 
leading or co-leading three of the four Framework outcome groups, and acting as integrator for 
collaborative United Nations country team action, balancing the three dimensions of the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
3. UNDP, with the country team and other economic and social actors, will contribute to effective 
and risk-informed public policies, putting national resources at the service of inclusive, sustainable 
and resilient socio-economic development that generates decent jobs, especially for vulnerable
groups. It will respond to socio-economic inequalities and exclusions, which were drivers for the 
2011 revolution and continue to threaten democratic gains. Tunisia achieved a Human 
Development Index rating of 0.793 in 2019, ranking 91st among 189 countries.
2 However, its 
inequality-adjusted rating drops to 0.585 (20 per cent loss). Regional disparities are critical: the 
regional development index decreased in all governorates, standing at 0.4863in 2018. Inclusion of 
women and youth remains weak. In 2015, the proportion of youth not in education, employment or 
training rose to 32.2 per cent, and that of young women had doubled (42.3 per cent versus 
22.5 per cent4). 
4. Inequalities increased globally during the pandemic, mostly in developing countries5. The 
Government took urgent measures to offset sudden loss of revenues
6
. As technical lead on the 
United Nations socio-economic response, UNDP published a study on socioeconomic impacts of 
the pandemic in Tunisia (2020)7, which reported that gross domestic product could fall by 4.4 per 
cent and global investment by 4.9 per cent. Unemployment could reach 21.6 per cent, compared to 
15 per cent and monetary poverty could reach 19.2 per cent compared to 15.2 per cent pre-COVID. 
As a result, revenues for approximately 475,000 people would fall below the monetary poverty 
line, exacerbating pre-existing regional disparities and inequalities, including between men 
(19.7 per cent) and women (18.7 per cent). Multidimensional poverty would increase (15.6 per cent
compared to 13.2 per cent currently8). The study informed both the Framework and the country 
team COVID response plan, with UNDP contributing to the latter in municipal response, evaluation 
and mitigation of microeconomic impacts, tele-justice, community policing, and fighting 
misinformation and ‘fake news’, with a gender dimension prioritizing economic violence and 
exclusion.
5. The country programme will contribute to the result on accountable institutions, fostering 
harmonized legislative frameworks and public engagement to reinforce the rule of law, access to 
rights, and social peace, particularly for the most vulnerable. Democratic transition remains 
incomplete and fragile. With the Independent High Authority for Elections, UNDP supported the 
first general (2014, 2019) and municipal elections (2018), which represented milestones in political 
participation and local governance. However, several constitutional and independent entities and 
1 National Institute of Statistics, 2017: 72.5% of Tunisians are unsatisfied with the democratic transition versus 22.4% satisfied, nearly equivalent 
to 2014 figures.
2 UNDP: Human Development Report 2019
3 The regional development index is based on the main causes of regional disparities in Tunisia: (a) essential commodities; (b) the social dimension; 
(c) human capital; (d) employment and employment market, http://www.itceq.tn/wp-content/uploads/files/notes2018/indicateur-dev-regional.pdf p13
4
ILO Work4Youth project: https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/ - ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_447495.pdf
5 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/fr_pr_human_development_on_course_to_decline_for_the_first_time_since_1990.pdf
6 Prime Minister’s statements:: http://www.mdici.gov.tn/covid-19-appui-aux-investisseurs-et-au-secteur-prive/ -
http://ecomnewsmed.com/article/5414/tunisie--quelles-sont-les-mesures-economiques-prises-par-le-gouvernement-pour-lutter-contre-les-consequencesdu-coronavirus7 Étude d’impact COVID sur l’économie tunisienne, PNUD Tunisie/Ministry of Development, Investment and International Cooperation, 2020: 
http://wwwmdicigovtn/impact-economique-de-la-pandemie-du-covid-19-sur-leconomie-tunisienne-pour-lannee-2020/structural reforms stipulated by the Constitution are still pending. This fragility was recognized in 
Tunisia’s Universal Periodic Review, 2017. 
6. As part of the country team, UNDP will support equitable, transparent, and sustainable 
management of natural resources, ecosystems, and territories by improving resilience and 
adaptation to climate risks, notably among the most vulnerable. Tunisia is endowed with 69 natural 
ecosystems, 12 agro-ecosystems, and protected areas extending over 6 per cent of its territory.
However, it has for decades been facing environmental degradation, exacerbated by anthropogenic 
factors related to poor governance and over-exploitation of natural resources. Environmental 
degradation costs the country around 2.7 per cent of its gross domestic product (GDP)
9
. This is 
compounded by a primary energy deficit reaching 4.8 million tons of oil equivalent (2018), and an 
energy independence rate of 50 per cent, bringing the energy bill to 40 per cent of the overall trade 
deficit balance in 2019. The nationally determined contribution depends on achievement of the 
energy sector objectives (75 per cent), particularly the Tunisian Solar Plan10 (25 per cent). 
7. Tunisia suffers from water scarcity11 aggravated by climate change; related regional disparities 
are often drivers of social conflicts. Water resources are limited (4,875 million cubic meters). 
Subterranean water and phreatic zones (44 per cent) are increasingly overexploited (117 per cent
in 2017). Water consumption (120.6 litres/day/inhabitant) is on the rise. Agriculture is the largest 
user (78 per cent) followed by potable water (19 per cent). Drinking water supply reached 
100 per cent in urban areas and 94.1 per cent in rural areas.
12
8. The country faced 2,500 natural events between 1983 and 2013, resulting in 1,075 deaths and 
$756 million in damages.
13 Studies on vulnerability to climate change showed that Tunisia is 
suffering its impacts: fall in precipitation and rising sea levels. The coastal zone,
14 hosting twothirds of the population, 79 per cent of economic activities and 76 per cent15 of tourism investments,
and most of the irrigated agriculture is highly vulnerable to climate risks.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
9. During the previous cycle, UNDP supported transparent national and local elections and the
creation of democratic entities prescribed in the Constitution. Pilot programmes on community
policing, social cohesion, youth inclusion (second-generation youth centres) and transparency 
(integrity islands) were scaled up in national policies and programmes. UNDP accompanied the 
development of the national strategy on entrepreneurship, the definition of the Paris Agreement 
nationally determined contributions and carbon pricing, disaster risk reduction, biodiversity
conservation, and climate adaptation. The midterm evaluation highlighted the need to accelerate
economic transition and consolidate democracy gains, ‘leaving no one behind’, through territorial
convergence and partnerships with civil society, academia and the private sector.
10. The value proposition of this country programme is based on national priorities, lessons 
learned from the previous cycle, human rights principles – including gender equity and leaving no 
one behind – and the comparative advantage of UNDP in Tunisia. Its development was approached 
from a systems perspective, using innovative methodologies. The newly established Accelerator
Lab facilitated a ‘signal mapping’ exercise to identify the ‘new normal’ and led a sentiment analysis 
exercise using social media that informed this country programme document and offset lockdown 
and social distancing constraints. The youth perspective was included using the results of an online 
challenge launched for this purpose using ‘Speculative Design’ methodology.
11. The proposed country programme adopts a systemic approach, prioritizing the development 
and consolidation of new aptitudes, both internally and among partners, to respond to complexities 
and uncertainties, promoting greener, more inclusive and more just strategic choices to accelerate 
and widen the impact of development. United Nations Volunteers will be mobilized to support the 
9 Note d’orientation, Plan Quinquennal de Développement 2016-2020 de la Tunisie.
10 Nationally appropriate mitigation actions supported by UNDP.
11 Water Risk Atlas 2019, World Resources Institute: https://www.wri.org/blog/2019/08/17-countries-home-one-quarter-world-population-faceextremely-high-water-stress?fbclid=IwAR2wrpvl83TNV0dIcFswDb-ixTu2qDtJA71cnbJfUTe03ueiLnMv1-AdMrs
12 Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries, November 2019: Rapport national du secteur de l’eau pour l’année 2018. 
13 DesInventar, United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction and UNDP, 2014.
14 Second national communication on climate change submitted by Tunisiadevelopment of new aptitudes, mostly at the local level. It will capitalize on the integrator role of 
UNDP through knowledge- and data-generation, innovation, strategic partnerships for coherent and 
collaborative action for post-COVID socioeconomic recovery,
16 and acceleration of the 2030 
Agenda. Inclusion, resilience, decentralization, prevention and financing for development are 
cross-cutting themes. 
12. The country office launched a 12-month research and reflection exercise for framing the issue 
of trust in Tunisia – the main element of the theory of change. This lies within the framework of a 
global UNDP initiative, ‘Deep Demo’, for improving system thinking and transformation. 
Outcome 1 (Framework item 1)
13. In 2025, institutions are leading effective, risk-informed public policies in partnership with 
economic and social actors, putting the resources of the country at the service of an inclusive, 
sustainable and resilient socio-economic development that generates decent jobs, especially for the 
most vulnerable.
14. UNDP will contribute to defining and localizing a new national ‘vision 2030’ to accelerate the 
attainment of Sustainable Development Goals during this Decade of Action, advocating for good 
governance, social protection, digitization and a green economy. Studies are under way to identify 
Sustainable Development Goals regression due to COVID-19, as well as environmental and 
climatic stakes for green recovery and building forward better. This will be complemented by an 
integrated national financing framework for development to operationalize the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda at the national level. 
15. Private sector focus will be expanded. The annual survey “Miqyes17” reported an 83 per cent
revenue reduction in small to medium-sized enterprises, which constitute 97 per cent of the 
productive sector; a deterioration of the business environment; and an increase in corruption 
perception. Further, 17.6 per cent of small and medium-sized enterprises reported a complete 
blockage post-COVID, and 50.4 per cent consider recovery very slow and compromised18. The
informal economy is the primary competitor of small and medium-sized enterprises, contributing 
50 per cent of GDP19 and providing 46 per cent of women’s employment.
20 With the United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and the International 
Labour Organization (ILO), youth and women’s empowerment, fighting informality and boosting 
innovation will be integrated into entrepreneurship eco-systems, the social and solidarity economy,
and local development. These will also inform a migrant-inclusive development approach for 
addressing, with the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the root causes of irregular 
migration.
16. Special attention will be paid to knowledge- and data-generation, development of decisionmaking tools, inputs to national policy dialogue with international financial institutions on socioeconomic issues, such as green economy; business environment for productivity, competitiveness 
and employability; alternative financing; digital gap; and poverty reduction. 
Outcome 2 (Framework item 2)
17. In 2025, accountable institutions, supported by a harmonized legislative framework and 
engaged populations, guarantee a strengthened rule of law, protection of human rights and social 
peace – particularly for the most vulnerable – in complementarity with the efforts of economic, 
social, and environmental development.
18. UNDP will continue supporting the rule of law and democratic consolidation – the 
establishment or consolidation of institutions, normative and institutional frameworks and 
structural reforms stipulated by the Constitution – that would guarantee the inclusion of vulnerable 
16 Technical leadership of UNDP on the United Nations framework for the immediate socio-economic response to COVID-19: 
https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/un_framework_report_on_covid-19.pdf
17 UNDP and the Confederation of Tunisian Enterprises: Miqyes survey, 2019 : http://www.hlb-tunisia.com/MIQYES-Sante-de-la-PME2018-22-05-2019.pdf
18 Miqyes survey, 2020.
19 https://lapresse
tn/7859/economie-informelle-des-indicateurs-a-la-hausse2015 data2019 analysisgroups, youth and women according to international standards of inclusive governance, 
accountability and transparency.
19. With the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UN-Women, UNDP will 
support the implementation of justice and security reforms; strengthen the strategic and 
administrative capacity of the parliament to bolster its constitutional role in a transparent and 
inclusive manner; prevent violent extremism; and promote anti-corruption and social cohesion. The
scaling up of the community policing model and the implementation of resolutions 1325 and 2250 
will lay the foundation for an inclusive, peaceful and resilient society.
20. The National Institute of Statistics21 reported unequal access to the benefits of democracy, 
particularly in the interior regions. UNDP is committed to an integrated and decentralized approach 
to promoting local governance and local development. The creation of 350 municipalities22 will 
promote greater equity in local development, inclusive policies and responsive public services, 
rooted in local specificities, the rights of vulnerable groups, and inclusion of women and youth. 
The regional council elections are expected in 2022. 
21. UNDP will accompany the Government in developing a multi-sectoral approach to integrating
the human rights approach to leaving no one behind. It will continue to consolidate an integrating 
framework for interventions around Sustainable Development Goal 16+, both internally and with 
United Nations partners, using a portfolio management approach that prioritizes complementarity, 
the evidence base, knowledge management, and innovation.
Outcome 3 (Framework item 4)
22. In 2025, all the actors involved will ensure equitable, transparent and sustainable management 
of natural resources, ecosystems and territories, improving their adaptive and resilience capacity as 
well as that of populations – especially the most vulnerable – facing crises and climate risks.
23. UNDP will support environmental governance and green low-carbon development to improve 
resilience in communities by reducing vulnerabilities; accelerate nationally determined 
contributions to climate action through mitigation and adaptation; and accompany the 
implementation of the national biodiversity strategy, continuing past support that resulted in the 
submission of the national biodiversity strategy and action plan horizon 2030 (2017) and the 
corresponding 6th national report (2018). This will involve the advocacy and integration of 
environmental and climate dimensions in public decisions on policies and investments, and
supporting prospective analyses and studies to favour risk mitigation in vulnerable communities,
using a gendered life-cycle approach. The cross-cutting aspects of governance and prevention of 
environmental conflicts will be addressed within an integrated, governance-socioeconomicenvironmental action. 
24. Technical assistance for access to climate finance will continue to implement the nationally 
determined contributions acceleration road map and consultation process that will facilitate a multisectoral overview of integrated measures, resources and means available, in the light of COVID19 realities. An expanded partnership with the World Bank will further the low-carbon strategy, 
including the ‘solar energy by 2050’ horizon. The aim is to align the economy with a low-carbon 
growth path, including greenhouse gas emissions accounting. The elaboration of a transparency 
and accountability reference framework will allow analysis of the impact of energy transition on 
the most vulnerable groups, with a differentiated gender lens.
25. The National System for Disaster Management, 1991, focuses on hazards and disasters, 
including vulnerability and risk reduction, dimensions that are essential for the assessment of 
multidimensional causes related to poverty, chaotic and illegal construction, and the 
malfunctioning of territorial management. The country has yet to develop tools to systematically 
identify and evaluate risks and their impacts, especially on investment decisions. UNDP will 
consolidate its support using a territorial approach that aims to reduce climate and disaster risks, 
21 National Institute of Statistics, 2017. Citizens’ perception of security, liberties and local governance in Tunisia. 
22 Local Authorities Code (Organic Law 48/2017)strengthen institutional coordination, reduce vulnerabilities in communities, and valorize local 
know-how and nature-based solutions.
26. UNDP is contributing to the joint intervention for integrated water resources management. 
With the Food and Agriculture Organization and UNICEF, UNDP will support the evaluation of 
risks associated with the loss of water resources, water stress due to climate change, and governance 
of water resources, especially the management of aquifers and their impact on social cohesion and 
food security affecting the most vulnerable, particularly in rural areas.
III. Programme and risk management
27. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, 
regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the 
Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
28. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure or funding 
conditions. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with 
other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
29. Participation of groups marginalized because of age, disability, gender, income, race,
migration status, or health conditions (HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, COVID-19) will be reinforced as 
a bottom-up mechanism in constructing inclusive policies and services in partnership with other 
United Nations organizations. A joint initiative will define the situations of vulnerability relevant 
to Tunisia to ensure that no one is left behind.
30. Acknowledging the potential of women and youth in promoting sustainable development, 
UNDP created dedicated dialogue spaces (such as Sustainable Development Goals camps and 
second-generation youth centres) to identify innovative solutions to development challenges and 
‘new normals’ brought by COVID-19. The roles of women and youth are crucial to sustaining 
social cohesion and preventing violent extremism linked to the regional geopolitical context. The 
Goals camps will ensure that actions are at the heart of youth aspirations. The gender question is 
integrated into the programming, and the country office intends to improve its Gender Seal bronze 
status. Attention will be paid to addressing the needs of women and men, which vary according to 
situation, age, level of education, race and location. 
31. Quality assurance, and the implementation of social and environmental safeguards, are 
institutional requirements to avoid or reduce potential social impacts and the environmental 
footprint of the programme.
32. The office will promote transformative development exchange through South-South and 
triangular cooperation in support of the three interlinked outcomes to which Tunisia has contributed 
in the past: experience on elections; access to justice; and transparency and parliamentary support. 
33. UNDP maintains its historical ranking as one of the most transparent organizations globally.
23
It plays an important role within the inter-agency operations group in pooling and optimizing 
common services. The country office regularly reviews its procedures and deploys technological 
tools for improving transparency, financial efficiency, optimization of resources and services to 
national partners, resident and non-resident United Nations organizations in Tunisia and Libya, 
business continuity – including remotely – and conformity of the common premises, hosting eight 
organizations, to security standards. It leads the effort for office/common premises ‘greening’ in 
line with the Administrator’s Climate Promise.
34. The joint reflection for the Framework identified several risks that could affect its 
implementation and, by default, this country programme: the lack of national consensus on an 
inclusive, sustainable and accountable socio-economic model; the onset of economic and financial 
shocks; suspension of international aid due to aid fatigue or repurposing of resources to respond to COVID-19 or humanitarian crises elsewhere; political instability; persistence of social mistrust 
and resistance to change; and the onset of natural events leading to disasters or new waves of 
pandemics. Through its follow-up systems (such as regular monitoring and the crisis dashboard), 
UNDP will anticipate risks and implement corrective measures in consultation with the country 
team and partners. A resource mobilization and communication plan will identify local resources, 
alternative finance, and partnerships. In addition to the global practitioners’ network, local rosters 
of national expertise are regularly updated for rapid mobilization.
35. Bottlenecks include constraints in access to information and statistical data; resistance to intersectoral collaboration for consolidating achievements and promoting transformational change;
delays in implementation, generally due to turnover in partner institutions; and heavy bureaucratic 
and administrative processes (such as customs clearance and tax exemption).
IV. Monitoring and evaluation 
36. UNDP will align to the monitoring and evaluation requirements set in the Framework. The 
evaluation plan and iterative monitoring and evaluation mechanisms will document achievements, 
progress, and lessons learned, and will inform implementation and portfolio development. 
Formative evaluations will be the central modality and the reference for updating and analysing
multidimensional challenges and COVID-19 ‘new normals’; supporting decision-making; scaling
up solutions; and promoting innovation, both internally and with partners. 
37. UNDP will partner with United Nations organizations and data-generating entities to
strengthen national capacity for monitoring the Sustainable Development Goals through nationally 
owned sources of data, and to enhance data quality and availability. Reliable disaggregated data is
essential to ensuring universal access to development. The simplification of statistics for the benefit 
of the wider public will be pursued in partnership with the National Institute of Statistics. 
38. Partnerships with United Nations organizations, associations, young volunteers, and the 
private sector will be reinforced to ensure inclusiveness, transparency, and diversification of
alternative, verifiable data sources, including through crowdsourcing and machine data analytics. Annex. Results and resources framework for Tunisia (2021–2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR OBJECTIVE: Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 10, 5, 8, 9, 11, 7
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1. In 2025, institutions are leading effective, risk-informed public policies in partnership with economic and social actors, putting the resources of the 
country at the service of an inclusive, sustainable and resilient socio-economic development that generates decent jobs, especially for the most vulnerable.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: 1, 2, and 3
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR 
PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME 
(in $ thousands)
Ind.1.1 (SDG 1.2.1): Proportion of 
the population living under the 
national poverty line, by sex and 
age.
Baseline
15.2% 
(2015 - national)
Target
TBD/Government
Ind.1.2 (SDG 1.2.2): Proportion 
of men, women, and children of all 
ages living in poverty in all its 
forms, in accordance with the 
definitions set by every country.
Baseline
28.97% (2016)
Target
TBD/Government
Ind.1.3 (SDG 8.3.1): Proportion of 
informal employment in nonagricultural sectors, by sex. 
Ind.1.1. Ministry of 
Development, Investment and 
International Cooperation
(MDICI)
National Institute of Statistics 
(INS)
World Bank
Ind.1.b MDICI
INS
UNDP
Ind.1.3: World Bank
International Labour 
Organization (ILO)
INS
Ind.1.4: INS, ILO
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.1. The 2030 vision, strategic planning and related public policies are aligned with the 
SDGs.
Indicator 1.1.a: Number and type of mechanisms and tools in support of inclusive public 
policies (e.g., urban, rural, environmental, social, economic, gender).
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: To be determined (TBD) (2025)
Source: Agencies’ reports, Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.1.b: Extent to which institutions make use of tools that help in decision-making 
(gender-sensitive, leaving no one behind) and new data.
Baseline (2021): 2 (Gender-sensitive budget, National Voluntary Report - RNV)
Target (2025): 5 24
Source: Agencies’ reports, observatories’ follow-ups; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.1.c: SDG targets covered by national planning
Baseline 2021: 191 Indicators defined by INS, 86 informed
Target (2025): Increase (TBD)
Source: MDICI (SDG platform), Frequency: Annual
MDICI
International financial 
institutions (World
Bank, African 
Development Bank, 
International 
Development Bank), 
European Union, 
Canada, Netherlands, 
UN-Women, ILO, 
IOM
Civil society 
organizations 
Private sector
President’s office
Regular: $3.9 m 
Other: $8.5 m 
Output 1.2. The business environment is inclusive, transparent, and favours private initiative, 
productivity, competitiveness and employment. 
Indicator 1.2.a: Number of partnerships targeting job creation (decent, innovative, green, 
inclusive for the most vulnerable and/or inked with post-COVID-19, women-based job)
networks)
Disaggregation: National/local, private/public
Baseline (2021): 2 (Entrepreneurial spaces; business centres and incubators)
Target (2025): TBD/Government
Source: Official publications, including those of observatories; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.2.b: Integrating ‘leaving no one behind’ dimensions in the support mechanisms, 
environmental regulations for green jobs, preservation of ecosystems, circular economy.
24 0: no tools used; 1: new tools developed; 2: new tools are in use by the institutions; 3: public policies informed by decision-making tools are formulatedBaseline
50%
Target
TBD/Government
Ind.2.4 (SDG 8.5.2); Rate of 
unemployment by sex, age, and 
handicap status.
Baseline
15,2% (national)
Target
TBD/Government
Baseline (2021): Mechanisms of support: Yes (micro-entrepreneur law)
Regulations: No
Target (2025): Yes
Source: Reports and regulations; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 1.2.c: Improving the national position in international rankings.
Baseline (2021): 
Institutions (World Economic Forum – WEF): 53, Job market (WEF): 49,4, Business dynamism 
(WEF): 59, Business creation (Doing Business report): 19
Target (2025): At least +2 points
Source: Tunisian Institute for Competitiveness and Quantity Studies (ITCEQ), Doing Business 
report, WEF, global competitiveness report; Frequency: Annual
Output 1.3. A new financial architecture favouring financial inclusion and new mechanisms of 
alternative and innovative financing is implemented.
Indicator 1.3.a: Extent to which alternative financing mechanisms (digitization, small and 
medium enterprises (SMEs) and cooperatives) are operable and gender-sensitive.
Baseline (2021): 1 (Crowdfunding)
Target (2025): 3 (0: no mechanisms identified; 1: alternative mechanisms proposed; 2: pilots tested, 
3: financial architecture tested; 4: tools and texts for operability proposed)
Source: Ministry of Finance, other reports, Frequency: annual
Indicator 1.3.b: Existence of green financing mechanisms.
Baseline (2021): No
Target (2025): Yes 
Source: Texts, reports; Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR OBJECTIVE: SDGs 16, 3, 5, 10, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2. In 2025, accountable institutions supported by a harmonized legislative framework and engaged populations guarantee the 
strengthening of the rule of law, the protection of human rights and social peace, particularly for the most vulnerable, in complementarity with the efforts of economic, social, and environmental development.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: 1, 2 and 3
Ind.2.a (SDG 10.3.1/16. b.1.) 
Proportion of the population that has
reported having been subjected to 
discrimination or harassment within 
the last 12 months for reasons 
violating international human rights 
law.
Baseline
60% (2017)
Economic situation: 19.8%;
Region: 12.7% 
Political affiliation: 2.6% 
Ind.2.a 
Periodic investigation (NIS, 
UNDP)
Ind.2.b 
Quinquennial investigation 
Multiple Indicator Cluster 
Surveys (UNICEF)
Periodic investigation 
INS/UNDP
Ind.2.c 
Output 2.1. Democratic institutions and legislative framework are consolidated in accordance 
with the Constitution and international standards and commitments.
Indicator 2.1.a: Degree of operationalization of democratic and constitutional institutions (courts 
and authorities) in accordance with the provisions of the constitution. (1: created; 2: operational; 
3: well-performing) 
Baseline (2021) :
Court: 0; Independent High Authority for Elections (ISIE): 2 Good Governance and Anti-corruption
(IBOGOLUC): 0; Communication and Audiovisual (ICA): 0; Human Rights (IDH): 2; Sustainable 
Development and Future Generations (IDDGF): 1 
Target (2025): 
Court: 0 / ISIE: 3 / IBOGOLUCC: 2 / ICA3
IDH: 3 / IDDGF: 3
Source : Annual reports, Frequency : Annual
President’s office
Ministry of Justice 
Constitutional and nonconstitutional authorities 
MDICI
Ministry of Local Affairs
NGOs (Avocats sans
Frontières, Scouts, 
Search for Common 
Ground)
Local security 
committees
Regular: $13.8 m
Other: $8.5 mHandicap: 1.8%; Sex: 7.5% 
Skin colour: 2.6%
Target
Decrease of 20%
Ind.2.b (SDG 16.3.1): Proportion of 
victims of violence within the last 
12 months who have reported such 
events to the relevant authorities or 
other officially recognized 
mechanisms of settlement
Baseline
(2018)
 Women :48%
 Men: 36%
Target
 Women: 60%
 Men: 50%
Ind.2.3 (SDG 16.6.1): Primary 
public expenditures in proportion to 
the initial approved budget, by sector
(Budget 2020)
Interior: 9.47%
Justice: 1.89%
Court and 
Constitutional bodies: 0.08%
Court of Auditors: 0.05%
Local affairs: 2.1%
Ministry of Women, Family, Childhood 
and Seniors: 0.49%
Min. Human Rights: See Budget Law 
2020
Parliament (0,09% - 2019)
Target
TBD/Government
Budget and complementary 
budget
Ind.2.d 
Universal Periodic Review 
(UPR) reports
Indicator 2.1.b: Extent to which independent non-constitutional public authorities are operable
(Instance d’accès à l'information – INAI ; Instance nationale pour la prévention de la torture –
INPT, Instance nationale de lutte contre la traite des personnes – INLCTP, Instance nationale de 
lutte contre la corruption – INLUCC, National Authority for Personal Data Protection – INPDP) 
(1: created; 2: operational; 3: conforms with international standards) 
Baseline (2021):
INAI: 2; INLUCC: 2; INPT: 2; INLCTP: 2
Target (2025): 
INAI: 3; INPDP: 3; INPT: 3; INLCTP: 3
Source: Annual United Nations and authorities’ reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.1.c: Number of sectoral legislations compliant with national and international 
standards of human rights, gender equality, right to work, and right to development
Baseline: 5/17 (2021) 
Target (2025): 15/17 
Source: Official Journal of the Republic of Tunisia, United Nations reports; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.d: Number of initiatives for the parliament that aim at reinforcing its representation, 
control, and legislation functions
Baseline (2021): 7 
Target (2025): 17
Data source: United Nations activity reports, Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.1.e: Proportion of the population whose latest experience with public service was 
satisfactory (disaggregation, men/women/youth)
Baseline (2021): TBD through INS survey
Target (2025): TBD
Source: INS; Frequency: TBD
Assembly of People’s 
Representatives 
Universities
Output 2.2. Systems and capacities of justice and security actors are modernized for higher 
efficacy, accessibility, and accountability in line with the principles of the rule of law, international 
law, gender equity and human rights.
Indicator 2.2.a: Extent to which new strategies for the reform of security, justice, and 
penitentiary systems are implemented (2022-2026)
(0: non-existent; 1: elaborated; 2: adopted; 3: budget allocated to strategy; 4: implemented; 
5: implementation follow-up.)
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target (2025): 4
Source: Ministries’ reports (Interior, Justice), United Nations organizations’ reports 
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.2.b: Reduction of proportion of population incarcerated pending trial
Baseline: 50% (2020: 9,000 persons)
Target (2025): 30% (disaggregation, men/women/youth)
Source: General Directorate of Prisons, Ministry of Justice; Frequency: AnnualInd.2.4 Percentage of formulated and 
accepted recommendations under the 
UPR that have been accepted and/or 
implemented 
Baseline
79% (UPR, 2017)
Formed: 242 
Accepted: 190 
Implemented: n/a
Target
Accepted: 90%
Implemented: 80%
Output 2.3 Institutional mechanisms of citizen participation, social dialogue, transitional justice 
and the prevention of violence are reinforced on a national and territorial level, and capacities of 
civil society and the most vulnerable are improved.
Indicator 2.3.a: Extent to which the government programme for adoption of the Truth and Dignity 
Commission recommendations has been implemented (0: non-existent; 1: implementation plan 
elaborated; 2: implementation started; 3: implementation follow-up)
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2025): 1 
Source: Annual reports (Parliament and Government); Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.3.b: Participative and inclusive aspects of the update, execution, and follow-up of the 
preventative part of the national strategy for counter-extremism and counterterrorism (yes: 1; 
no: 0; for the three phases (update, execution, follow-up) 
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2025): 1 
Source: Annual reports; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.3.c: Degree to which the strategy for good governance and anti-corruption on a 
territorial level is implemented ensuring fair and just gender representation at all levels
(0: non-existent; 1: elaborated; 2: adopted; 3: partially implemented; 4: halfway through full 
implementation; 5: fully implemented)
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 3/5
Source: INLUCC/UNDP reports, Frequency: Annual
Indicator 2.3.d: Number of SDG16+ progress reports elaborated
Baseline (2020): 1 
Target (2025): 3
Source: INS, MDICI, Frequency: Annual
NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR OBJECTIVE: SDGs 7, 11, 13, 14, 15
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4. In 2025, all committed actors will ensure an equitable, transparent, and sustainable management of natural resources, 
ecosystems, and territories by improving their resilience/adaptation as well as that of populations, notably the most vulnerable in the face of climate risks.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOMES: 2 and 3
Ind.3.a Proportion of population 
using securely managed sanitation 
services, especially equipment 
dedicated to hand-washing with 
water and soap 
Baseline
92%
(Wash report, 2017)
Target
Ind.3.a 
Wash International Bank
Ind.3.b 
INS
Ind.3.c
State budget,
Budget and Complementary 
Budget 
Output 3.1. Public, private, and civil society actors have the necessary tools and capacities for 
sustainable, equitable, and participative governance of natural resources, ecosystems, and 
environment services.
Indicator 3.1.a (SDG 6.b1): Proportion of local administrations having put in place policies and 
operational procedures that involve participation of local population in rational management of 
water and sanitation
Baseline (2020): TBD (evaluation to be conducted)
Target (2025): TBD/Government 
Source: Reports, Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.1.b: Number of 2030 climate objectives updated and integrated into the PDQ 
President’s office
Ministry of Environment 
and its agencies
Ministry of Energy, 
Mines and Energy 
Transition
MDICI
Ministry of Local Affairs 
Regular $4.9 m
Other: $25.096 m100%
Ind.3.c (ODD 15.a.1) Public aid for 
development and public 
expenditures dedicated to 
preservation and sustainable 
exploitation of biodiversity and 
ecosystems
Baseline
TBD
Target
TBD/Government
Ind.3.d (ODD 11.b.1) Adoption and 
implementation of national strategies 
for reduction of disaster threats, in 
accordance with the Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (2015-2030)
Baseline
No 
Target
Yes
Ind.3.e (ODD 13.2.1) Putting in 
place or implementing an integrated 
policy/strategy/plan to improve
adaptability to negative climate 
incidents, reinforce resilience in the 
face of such incidents, and reduce 
greenhouse emissions, without 
threatening food production 
(national plan of adaptation, 
predetermined national contribution, 
national communication, updated
biennial report) 
Baseline
No 
Ind.3.d 
MDICI
Ministry of Environment
Ind.3.e
Ministry of Environment
Baseline (2020): (a) Emergence of the first nationally determined contribution (NDC) in 2015 with a 
climate objective being a reduction of 41% in carbon intensity compared to 2010; (b) PDQ 2016-2020 
integrates a green economy axis that includes energy intensity and renewable energy objectives.
Target (2025): At least one objective
Source: MDICI, Ministry of Energy Transition, Ministry of Local Affairs and Environment (MALE)
Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.1.c: Number of partners who favour involvement, sensitization, and behavioural 
change, notably of youth and the most vulnerable, on environment and rational water 
management education.
Baseline (2020: 0 
Target (2025): TBD/Government 
Source: United Nations reports; Frequency: Annual
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Water Resources and 
Fishing 
Research 
NGOs
Private sector
Output 3.2. Concerned actors are equipped to develop and implement a territorial approach that 
favours integrated management of ecosystems and natural resources, taking into account the 
effects of climate change.
Indicator 3.2.a25 Number of identified reforms and decision-making tools that contribute to 
inclusive and sustainable management of natural resources and ecosystems (biodiversity, 
coastlines, water) and target the most vulnerable (gender, leaving no one behind)
Baseline (2020): 3 (national integrated strategy for management of coastal areas; 6
th national report; 
Biodiversity strategy H2030)
Target (2025): 6
Source: Reports, articles, documents; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.2.b Implementation of national and territorial urban policy integrating sustainable 
management of ecosystems and natural resources.
Baseline (2021): TBD (evaluation to be launched)
(0: non-existent; 1: national; 2: territorial) 
Target (2025): TBD/Government
Source: MALE; Frequency: Annual
Output 3.3: Concerned actors have elaborated integrated public policies that are both sensitive 
and resilient to climate change and to shocks, including COVID-19, and contribute to green 
growth.
Indicator 3.3.a (SDG 1.5.4): Proportion of local administrations that have adopted and 
implemented disaster risk strategies that conform to national strategies
Baseline (2020): TBD (evaluation)
Target (2025): TBD/Government 
Source: MALE; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.3.b Number of green measures integrated in plans, including the plan for postCOVID-19 socioeconomic recovery 
25 UNDP-only indicator.Target
Yes
(a) NDC; (b) Energy poverty; (c) Code de l’aménagement du territoire et de l’urbanisme,
integrating climate risk, Water Act project)
Disaggregation: National/local/interregional
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2025): At least 2
Source: United Nations reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.3.c: Degree to which environmental dimension (green employment, sustainable 
transport, renewable energy, energy efficiency, eco-construction, equitable tourism, ecosystems 
preservation, circular economy) has been integrated into the planning and financing of 
development policies
Baseline (2019): (a) Presence of two plans for expediting renewable energy and energy efficiency. 
(b) Presence of national strategy for a social economy that integrates dimensions 3 and 4 (1: nonexistent; 2: mentioned only; 3: favourable planning and financing)
Source: MDICI; Frequency: Annual
Output 3.4. Public, private, and civil society actors have implemented tools for the reduction and 
management of risks.
Indicator 3.4.a: Emergency plans on national and regional levels adopted and operational
Baseline (2020): To be determined (evaluation)
Target (2025): TBD/Government 
Source: Administrative and agency reports 
Law ref: 91-39, 8 June 1991
Decree ref: 93-942, 26 April 1993; Frequency: Annual
Indicator 3.4.b: Degree to which mechanisms and approaches for crisis and disaster recovery are 
operationalized
Baseline (2018): Presence of recovery plan limited to Nabeul governorate following floods.
Target (2025): 3 (1: absent, 2: partial, 3: fully operational)
Source: United Nations reports; Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.4.c: Inclusion of women, youth, and vulnerable populations in disaster risk 
prevention measures 
Baseline (2019): TBD (evaluation)
Target (2025): 2 
(0: no inclusion; 1: participative diagnostics; 2: preventative measures informed by vulnerability 
analyses and participative diagnostics; 3: operationalization of measures relating to women, youth, and 
the vulnerable)
Source: United Nations reports; Frequency: annual