File Name: TUR-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Turkey
Country Code: TUR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
9 July 2020
Original: English
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Turkey (2021-2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ....... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ................................ ............. 4
III. Programme and risk management ................................ ................. 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation ................................ ....................... 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Turkey (2021-2025) ............................. 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework
1. Turkey is an upper-middle-income country and an emerging global player. It has
achieved commendable economic and social development results since the early 
2000s, making it the world’s nineteenth largest economy. Turkey ranks 59 of 189 
countries in the Human Development Index (HDI) with an HDI value of .806
compared to .579 in 1990. The past two decades have seen a steady, marked 
improvement in most of its development indicators. For example, life expectancy at
birth has increased by 13.2 years, mean years of schooling by 3.1 years and expected 
years of schooling by 7.5 years. The gross national income per capita increased by 
122.1 per cent in the same period. However, when adjusted for inequality, the HDI 
falls to 0.675, representing a loss of 16.2 per cent. In the Gender Inequality Index, 
Turkey ranks 64 of 189 countries with a score of 0.641. The country’s domestic and 
international affairs have been significantly impacted by security-related challenges 
along the Syrian-Turkish border. Turkey hosts the largest refugee1 population in the 
world, with 4 million externally displaced persons including 3.58 million Syrians 
under temporary protection. The replacement of the parliamentary system with a 
presidential system of government in 2018 resulted in a transformation of public 
administration and policies.
2. The Government’s vision is that Turkey be stronger and more prosperous,
producing more value-added goods and services and sharing the dividends more fairly
by 2023. The eleventh National Development Plan (NDP) shapes Turkish 
development policies with the long-term objective of becoming a high-income 
country with very high human development. The NDP has five axes
2
and puts forward 
a new economic model targeting value-added, competitive industrial protection which 
will spur growth in the gross domestic product. It stresses that all sectoral and 
thematic policy documents will be aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals,
based on national priorities. The country’s second voluntary national review strongly
emphasizes Goals 4, 8, 9, 13, 16 and 17,
3 which cover the themes of strengthening 
physical and human infrastructure and developing the legal-institutional 
superstructure. Clean energy is also a strategic area for Turkey due to its dependency 
on external resources for energy and its energy supply security policy.
4
3. In line with the NDP, the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF) 2021-2025 supports four priority5areas to complement 
national development priorities and efforts towards achieving the Sustainable 
Development Goals, in line with international norms and standards as applicable and 
the principle of leaving no one behind. The unique proposition of UNDP in all four 
areas is deeply anchored in the UNSDCF theory of change and underpinned by its 
__________________
1 The term “refugee” as utilized in this document refers to international protection applicants, 
international protection status holders (refugees, conditional refugees and subsidiary protection 
status holders) and temporary protection beneficiaries as per the Law on Foreigners and 
International Protection (2013).
2 Stable and strong economy; Competitive production and productivity; Well-qualified human 
resources and strong society; Livable cities and sustainable environment; Rule of law, 
democratization and good governance.
3 Goal 4, quality education; Goal 8, decent work and economic growth; Goal 9, industry, 
innovation and infrastructure; Goal 13, climate action; Goal 16, peace, justice and strong 
institutions; and Goal 17, partnerships for the Goals. 
4 Government of Turkey, Turkey’s 2nd VNR 2019, Sustainable Development Goals: Strong 
Ground for Common Goals, p.12.
5
Inclusive and equitable social development; Competitive production, productivity and decent 
k fllClithtiblitliblitid Gd d vast experience of managing change at three layers of development, i.e.,
policymaking, institutional change and implementing prototypes through innovation,
in a complementary manner. UNDP will provide its well-tested, scalable models for 
local socioeconomic development with a strong environmental focus and rely on its 
solid partnerships at local, regional and national levels to catalyse new, innovative 
solutions. The UNDP triple partnership with the Government6 provides scope for 
facilitating its agenda of supporting the least developed countries, as specified in the
UNSDCF. 
4. Transposing its Sustainable Development Goal integrator role and in close 
cooperation with the United Nations Country Team (UNCT), UNDP will provide 
integrated policy support to the Government on the Goals, including for its plans to 
establish a national coordination mechanism,
7
strengthen means of implementation
and measure progress towards the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 
Decade of Action.
5. The response to the Syrian crisis across the humanitarian-development nexus 
has positioned UNDP as the lead United Nations agency on resilience due to its 
unique programme implementation experience and role in strategic
oversight/coordination as co-chair of the Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan (3RP)
with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Resilience 
interventions have been gradually scaled up since the inception of the 3RP in 2015 
and the resilience component represents most of the appeal as of 2020. In responding 
to Turkish development and humanitarian response priorities, the 3RP will continue 
to constitute an important platform for innovation and partnerships and for progress 
under the comprehensive refugee response framework, the global compact on 
refugees and the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. UNDP 
work has been key in implementing these instruments in Turkey.
6. UNDP is well positioned to facilitate stronger United Nations engagement with 
the Turkish private sector through its technical support for the Istanbul International 
Centre for Private Sector in Development to accelerate the sustainable development 
agenda. Financing sustainable development will be at the centre of UNDP efforts to 
expand and strengthen private sector partnerships. UNDP will strengthen private 
sector engagement in coordination with the Government through a platform approach, 
and innovative financing models will be introduced, particularly to address renewable 
energy and energy efficiency. UNDP will increase the pace and thrust of private sector 
engagement in inclusive businesses, innovative financing and sustainable 
development advocacy. Business for Goals8and the Connecting Business Initiative9
will be important assets. Leveraging its Accelerator Lab, UNDP will mainstream 
innovation and experimentation across the country programme through partnerships 
and innovative tools like collective intelligence, crowdsourcing, behavio ural science, 
co-design and digital governance. 
7. The socioeconomic effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic 
are likely to have serious consequences for certain groups, particularly the elderly, 
youth, women and Syrian refugees. Additional vulnerabilities may be observed for
other socioeconomic groups potentially at risk for loss of income or access to social 
support. Acknowledging the possible impacts in its country programme for 2021-
2025 and fulfilling its integrator role, UNDP will be technical lead for the United 
__________________
6 The country office, the Istanbul Regional Hub and the Istanbul International Centre for Private 
Sector in Development.
7 The eleventh NDP addresses establishing the National Sustainable Development Coordination 
Board to coordinate efforts to achieve the Goals at all levels.
8 htt
//bi4l/Nations response for the medium- and long-term socioeconomic impacts to prevent 
any deceleration in the achievement of the Goals by drawing from a network of global 
and regional expertise and the UNCT. The strong collaboration of UNDP with the 
private sector will be key to supporting small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
in navigating their way through the crisis, as their loss would imply lowered economic 
growth in the post-pandemic period. UNDP will leverage its digital expertise for 
response and recovery from COVID-19 by supporting solutions for the needs of the 
most disadvantaged groups and for a larger digital transformation. It will promote
fast-track social assistance, awareness-raising and capacity development, and help 
leverage fintech solutions.
8. The independent evaluation of the country programme for 2016-202010 noted 
that UNDP work on productivity-focused competitiveness and use of technology for 
industrial transformation provided long-term solutions on the sectoral and regional 
scales which resulted in income generation and employment. Drawing on the 
strengths as well as the lessons outlined in the evaluation, UNDP posits that equitable 
and sustainable growth in Turkey will be based on a risk-informed, sustainable 
economy and environment, effective and modern governance systems and durable 
solutions for displacement. The country programme will position UNDP to contribute 
referred development areas, making use of a wide range of data and of the 
opportunities offered by digitalization, deep exploration and experimentation to 
create new, inclusive solutions to development issues.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
9. The country programme has been designed in consultation with key 
stakeholders including the public and private sectors, civil society, local authorities 
and disadvantaged populations. To uphold the principle of leaving no one behind, 
priority will be given to those with special needs including the poor, migrants, 
women, youth, the unemployed, people with disabilities and those worst affected by
climate change and disasters. Partnerships across government, the private sector and 
civil society and action through inclusive platforms will be at the centre of UNDP 
work. Communication about the development work will help to shortcut solutions and 
partnerships and mobilize resources for the identified programmatic areas. Innovative 
and policy-oriented partnerships will be explored with thought institutions to 
strengthen the collective intelligence of UNDP. Partnerships with international 
financial institutions (IFIs) in areas like Sustainable Development Goal financing, 
rural development and green industrial development will be reinforced.
10. The country’s emphasis in the next five years will be on enhancing competitive 
production and productivity, as articulated in the eleventh NDP. To support this goal, 
the country programme will be anchored in the overarching vision of equitable and 
rights-based, inclusive and sustainable growth. The adoption of green-growth policies 
and regulatory frameworks in specific sectors and localities, particularly in key cities, 
will drive new sustainable economic models to encourage innovative, targeted 
financing that will create environmentally friendly business models and promote 
private sector engagement. These trends will be further driven by the innovations and 
technological opportunities offered by the fourth industrial revolution across key 
sectors and population groups. The focus will be on actions that are conducive to the 
reduction of inequalities, the rationalization of the sustainable use of natural resources 
and mitigation and adaptation to climate change. Priority will be given to the transfer 
of innovative and environmentally sound technologies and practices in the energy, 
agriculture, forestry, protected areas, water and basic infrastructure development sectors. This calls for good governance systems that thrive on integrity and highquality services in line with the new government system. 
11. Leveraging its strong presence in Turkey, UNDP will continue to ensure that the 
country programme contributes to South-South and triangular cooperation through 
the sharing of tools and practices in areas including but not limited to e-governance, 
digital solutions, private sector partnerships and resilience-based development. Based 
on the country’s very active role in global debate and policymaking on refugee 
response and migration, UNDP will continue to share and provide visibility to good 
practices.
Risk-informed, sustainable economy and environment
12. UNDP will support inclusive and sustainable local economic development 
initiatives that invest in production and the use of critical technologies for increased 
productivity and improved competitiveness of the Turkish economy. This will be key 
to responding to the possible economic impacts of COVID-19. Given the impacts of 
COVID-19 on tourism sector, UNDP will maintain its catalytic role in the promotion 
of innovative sustainable local tourism models and the development of contextspecific strategies, incorporating investment and financing modalities, to attract the 
right profile of partners and capital. Organized industrial zones and innovation centres 
will advance the innovation agenda by promoting instruments such as lean 
manufacturing and digitalization, and green innovations such as zero waste and the 
circular economy, resource efficiency and renewable energy. UNDP will use 
innovative financing schemes including impact investment and entrepreneurship 
support.
13. UNDP will deploy the three most effective instruments at its disposal – namely, 
skills formation, social cohesion and the design and implementation of inclusive 
social policies, including social care services – to address the specific needs of people 
with disabilities and the elderly, youth unemployment and women’s unpaid work and 
ensure the economic and social empowerment of disadvantaged groups. The use of 
digital transformation and the enhancement of the digital skills of young people will
support UNDP work on productivity and competitiveness. While promoting economic 
transformation models, poor rural areas will be prioritized for inclusive social 
development. Disadvantaged groups will be supported with financial /non-financial 
assets to improve their livelihood opportunities and engage in economic activities. 
14. Climate resilience will be promoted through financial tools and the development 
of climate action solution prototypes for both mitigation and adaptation, improving 
the country’s response to systemic shocks and natural disasters at urban and sector al 
levels. Effective monitoring by relevant Turkish authorities and governance 
mechanisms will be established to manage the effects of climate change and natural
disasters. UNDP will focus on risk and disaster management, working with cities, the 
private sector and civil society to limit the impact of natural hazards and support 
economic recovery. Natural resources and biodiversity will be managed through 
improved policy and strengthened institutional/financial capacities for a sustainable 
environment. Renewable energy and energy-efficient solutions such as energy service 
companies and crowd-investing will be promoted via viable financing frameworks
with the participation of all actors, especially the private sector.
15. The country programme will place special emphasis on waste management. 
Sites contaminated with industrial and chemical waste will be managed in an 
environmentally sound manner. For consumer waste, recycling and other 
interventions in line with the Government’s Zero Waste Policy will aim to transform
consumer preferences and ensure societal ownership of a circular economy model. International Labour Organization (ILO), United Nations Environment Programme 
and United Nations Industrial Development Organization will be strengthened in this 
connection. 
Durable solutions to displacement
16. UNDP is uniquely positioned, both among the 3RP partners and due to its strong 
local networks, to respond to challenges around the socioeconomic inclusion of 
refugees. It will continue to promote adult language skills-building for Syrians on a 
wide scale through its innovative blended model of training and supporting their 
access to the formal labour market in line with government employment policies. 
UNDP will maintain its strong position in promoting access to technology and 
innovation for SMEs and training and job placements for youth. This includes, for 
instance, facilitation of access to employment through techno-entrepreneurship 
support programmes for highly skilled youth among Syrian and host community 
populations in tech-intensive sectors and vocational training in the renewable energy
sector. UNDP will continue to acknowledge the important role of the private sector 
(Turkish and Syrian) and work closely with local chambers of industry and commerce.
17. UNDP social cohesion interventions will involve building on the support 
provided to municipalities to strengthen their role in fostering dialogue and 
participation to identify joint solutions to common problems. UNDP will seek to
improve the living conditions of Syrians and host communities by investing in core 
local public services, especially in areas where Syrians make up a large proportion of 
local population. The timely delivery of quality municipal support will be a niche area 
for the UNDP response to the impact of crisis at the city level. Besides investing in 
critical infrastructure related to basic services, efforts will be made to improve 
strategic decision-making at the local level for better service provision. Improved 
facilitation of access to judicial services will help to enhance social cohesion among 
communities. All this will directly support the implementation of the Government’s 
Harmonization Strategy for 2018-2023. Partnerships with 3RP partners and IFIs will 
be strengthened in connection with these issues. 
Effective, modern governance systems
18. The capacities of institutions11 to fulfil their responsibilities under national 
legislation and in line with international principles as applicable will be supported.
Access to justice and the effectiveness and quality of judicial services will be 
enhanced through continued promotion of legal aid, including for survivors of 
violence against women and girls, youth, people with disabilities and refugees. UNDP 
interventions regarding access to justice will support the implementation of the 
national policy on the judicial reform process. UNDP will work towards ensuring the 
full implementation of the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and 
supporting business in preserving civic space.
19. The transparency, accountability and integrity of legislative bodies, the 
judiciary and other institutions at national and local levels will be promoted through 
a partnership with Parliament which will support strengthening its legislative
capacities. UNDP support for transparency in the high judiciary has been successful 
and will be implemented fully at the national level. The long-standing UNDP support 
for effective and quality local service delivery as well as transparent and participatory 
local governance will continue. UNDP will establish partnerships between civil 
society organizations and local authorities by raising awareness about the mutual 
benefits of cooperation, encouraging sustainable dialogue and building the capacity 
necessary for interaction. In the context of voluntarism and civil society, efforts will be made towards improving the regulatory framework, expanding voluntarism 
practices for young people, persons with disabilities and the elderly, and 
strengthening partnerships and coordination among the public and private sectors, 
universities and non-governmental organizations. Considering the importance of 
security sector reform in promoting good governance, capacities and means will be 
enhanced for integrated border management and security service delivery. The longterm support of UNDP to e-governance systems will be enhanced to ensure the 
coherence and improve the effectiveness and efficiency of public services.
20. The empowerment of women and girls via equal access to resources, 
opportunities and the right to be free from violence and discrimination will be 
formulated as a cross-cutting dimension. Economic development initiatives will be 
designed with an eye towards increasing women’s participation in the labour market 
by addressing structural barriers in education and the burden of unpaid care work. 
Additional priorities will include access to decent jobs, including in the technology 
and digital sectors, support for entrepreneurship, addressing the pay gap and 
increasing women’s presence at decision-making levels in the public and private 
sectors. Environmental interventions will consider the different impacts of climate 
change and environmental hazards on the lives of men and women. Importantly, the 
capacities of public institutions will be improved to address all forms of violence 
against women, and to improve the use and collection of data, and access to services.
Cooperation with strong women’s rights advocacy groups will provide opportunities
to strengthen and disseminate UNDP results in the above areas. The involvement and 
empowerment of young men/women will also be prioritized. Partnerships with ILO, 
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), United Nations Volunteers programme 
and United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
(UN-Women) will be strengthened to these ends. 
III. Programme and risk management
21. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for 
results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. 
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with 
respect to country programmes is prescribed in the organization’s programme and 
operations policies and procedures and internal control framework.
22. The programme will be nationally executed. The harmonized approach to cash 
transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to 
manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
23. The programme will be implemented under the coordination of the Presidency 
of Strategy and Budget, which is the coordinating agency for 
international cooperation and sustainable development. Projects will be implemented 
by national and local institutions that will be primarily responsible for delivering 
results. In line with United Nations reform and its Sustainable Development Goal 
integrator role, UNDP will work in coordination with other United Nations agencies. 
Joint programmes and actions will be promoted with UNFPA, the United Nations 
Children’s Fund and UN-Women in response to the common chapter of their strategic 
plans.
24. The assumption for the implementation of the programme is continued 
commitment to the European Union accession process and to the political reform 
agenda. The implementation of the programme may be subject to certain risks, development and social cohesion; (b) low resource mobilization in the upper-middle 
income country context; and (c) persistent impacts of disasters including COVID-19 
on livelihoods. 
25. To mitigate and to manage these risks, UNDP will: (a) continue to focus on 
major integrated and transformational projects for greater impact and efficiency; 
(b) utilize its leadership role on resilience and rely on its local partnerships, especially 
with municipalities, civil society and development agencies, to develop integrated 
solutions to local needs; (c) strengthen its resource mobilization strategy to diversify 
its resource and funding base by extending the support of multilateral and bilateral 
partners, the private sector and IFIs; (d) integrate institutional capacity-building 
actions into the programme to strengthen an accountable system of governance in the 
new government system; and (e) utilize its leading role in the United Nations system 
regarding private sector partnerships to contribute to efforts for sustainable growth. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
26. UNDP will promote responsibility and accountability throughout the 
programme management cycle by aligning the country programme monitoring and 
evaluation framework with those of the UNSDCF and the NDP.
12 The programme 
results and resources framework are fully aligned with the integrated results and 
resources framework of the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. UNDP will work with 
the Presidency of Strategy and Budget, as coordinating government institution, and 
with implementing partners and representatives of beneficiaries to assess progress on 
implementation and foster learning and timely decision-making. 
27. To track the contribution of the programme to transformative change, UNDP 
will increase its in-house capacity for collection, analysis and utilization of data 
disaggregated by sex and age. The programme will supplement traditional tools with 
innovative ones and engagement with civil society to strengthen data collection and 
analysis. UNDP gender markers will be used to track investments and improve 
planning and decision-making to empower women and girls.
__________________
12 In line with NDP Policy 821.2 and the UNSDCF, the relevant data for all programmes and 
jtill bidd thh thliiftittblhd bthDP/DCP/TUR
9491 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 11th NDP Axis 3. Well Qualified Human Resources and Strong Society, Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1.3: By 2025, people under the Law on Foreigners and International Protection are supported towards selfreliance
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, 
TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF 
DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS (including 
indicators, baselines targets14)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
Number of work permits 
given to foreigners by type 
of application and sex
Baseline: 115,837 (41% 
women)
Target: 167,000
Ministry of Family, 
Labour and Social 
Services (MoFLSS)
Output 1.1. Displaced populations are equipped with the 
knowledge and skills to engage in the socioeconomic life of their 
host community
1.1.1 Number of people benefiting from jobs and improved livelihoods 
in crisis or post-crisis settings, disaggregated by sex 
Baseline: 66,200
Target: 96,500 (at least 30% women)
Data source: Project progress reports/donor reports
Output 1.2 Risk-informed mechanisms supported to build 
consensus, improve social dialogue and promote peaceful, just and 
inclusive societies
1.2.1 Number of people benefiting from social cohesion activities 
disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 53,700
Target: 75,900 (at least 50% women)
Data source: Project progress reports/donor reports 
Output 1.3 Core government functions and inclusive services
strengthened post-crisis for harmonization and durable solutions 
to displacement
1..3.1 Number of institutions strengthened for better service delivery 
for displaced populations and host communities 
Baseline:15
Target: 32
Data source: Project progress reports/donor reports 
Employment Agency (ISKUR)
Development banks (KfW, 
World Bank)
Turkish Red Crescent 
Turkish state-owned 
development and investment 
bank (ILBANK)
Ministry of Youth and Sport 
MoFLSS
Local public authorities
Public education centres
Chambers of Commerce
Regular $386,000
Other $16,967,000
__________________
13 UNSDCF outcome indicators are still under consultation with the Government of Turkey. Indicative outcome indicators reflected here are draft and may be changed 
based on UNSDCF discussionsDCP/TUR/4
6 20-0
Output 1.4 Sustainable job opportunities created for displaced 
populations and host communities
1..4.1 Number of interventions to increase labour
absorption capacity of businesses to accommodate displaced 
populations
Baseline: 15
Target: 20
Data source: Project progress reports/donor reports 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 11th NDP Axis 2. Competitive Production and Productivity, Sustainable Development Goals 2, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2.1: By 2025, public institutions and the private sector contribute to more inclusive, sustainable and innovative 
industrial and agricultural development, and equal and decent work opportunities for all, in cooperation with the social partners.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions 
Land allocated to organic and 
good agricultural practices
Baseline
Hectares:1,242,499
Proportion: 5.4% 
Target:
Hectares:1,978,000
Proportion:8.9%
Proportion of high- and 
medium-high-tech 
manufacturing industry value 
added in total value added
Baseline: 32.1%
Target: 38%
FAO and IFAD
Turkish Statistical 
Institute (Turkstat)
Output 2.1: Capacities at national and local levels 
strengthened to promote inclusive local economic 
development 
2.1.1 Number of inclusive local economic development 
partnerships at scale for accelerating sustainable economic 
growth
Baseline: 43
Target: 72
Data source: Project progress reports
Output 2.2 Solutions scaled up for sustainable commodities 
and green and inclusive value chains 
2..2.1 Number of enterprises and initiatives promoting inclusive 
business models
Baseline: 18
Target: 93 
Data source: Project progress reports
2.2.2 Number of enterprises and initiatives promoting 
sustainable value chains and climate resilient development
Baseline: 12 
Target: 38
Data source: Project progress reports
Output 2.3 Capacities strengthened to raise awareness on 
and to fight structural barriers to women’s economic 
empowerment 
2..3.1 Number of partnerships raising awareness to remove 
barriers in front of women's economic empowerment
Presidency of Strategy and 
Budget (PSB)
Ministry of Industry and 
Technology (MoIT)
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Forestry (MoAF)
Ministry of Culture and Tourism 
Ministry of Energy and Natural 
Resources 
Southeastern Anatolia Regional 
Development Administration 
Regional development 
administrations 
European Union delegation to 
Turkey 
MoFLSS
Chambers of Commerce
SME Development Organization
(KOSGEB)
Regular $386,000
Other $115,848,649DP/DCP/TUR
9491 1
Target: 26
Data Source: Project progress reports
Output 2.4: Disadvantaged groups, particularly the rural 
poor, women and youth, gain access to financial and nonfinancial assets and skill formation to benefit from 
sustainable livelihoods and jobs
2.4.1 Number and proportion of people accessing financial and 
non-financial assets disaggregated by sex:
Baseline: 6,500
Target: 19,800 (at least 40% women)
Data Source: IFAD independent evaluations, project progress 
reports
2.4.2 Number of people benefiting from skill formation and 
employment opportunities disaggregated by sex
Baseline: 2,127,082
Target: 2,136,047 (at least 40% women)
Data Source: Project progress reports
Associations (TUSIAD, 
TURKONFED)
Think tanks
Universities 
Local public authorities
Public education centres
NGOs
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 11th NDP Axis 4. Liveable Cities and Sustainable Environment, Sustainable Development Goals 5, 6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3.1: By 2025, all relevant actors take measures to accelerate climate action, to promote responsible production 
and consumption, to improve the management of risks and threats to people, and to ensure sustainable management of the environment and natural resources in urban and ecosystem 
hinterlands.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
Proportion of solid waste 
regularly collected and with 
adequate final discharge out of 
total solid waste generated
Baseline: 78.6%
Target: 91.87%
Renewable energy share in the 
total final energy consumption
Baseline: 7.5%
Target: 8.3%
Turkstat
Output 3.1: Evidence-based assessment and planning tools and 
mechanisms applied to enable gender-responsive climate change 
adaptation and mitigation to limit the impact of natural hazards 
3.1.1 Number of regulatory and technical tools and mechanisms 
applied for disaster management
Baseline: No regulatory tools, three technical tools for the private 
sector, 
Target: One regulatory tool, five technical tools 
Data source: CBI, B4G 
3.1.2 Number of data-informed development and investment plans 
that incorporate solutions to enable climate change adaptation and 
mitigation
Baseline: 12 greater municipality plans, 1 national strategy
Target: 26 national/sectoral/urban plans in place 
Data source: Standard Guidelines by MoEU
Ministry of Environment and 
Urbanization (MoEU)
MoAF
MoIT
Ministry of Finance 
Disaster and Emergency 
Management Authority of Turkey
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
(MoFA)
Private Sector 
European Union delegation to 
Turkey
Regular $386,000
Other $22,838,662DCP/TUR/4
6 20-0
capita, excluding major mineral 
wastes
Baseline: 36%
Target: 30%
management of natural resources
3.2.1 Number of gender-responsive solutions for conservation, 
sustainable use, and equitable access to natural resources, 
biodiversity and ecosystems:
(a) Policy framework:
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 
Data source: MoAF, Official Gazette. (b) Institutional framework: 
Baseline: 0 
Target:5
Data source: MoAF, Official Gazette. (c) Financing framework:
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1 
Data source: MoAF, Official Gazette. (d) Demonstration
Baseline: 0
Target: 1
Data Source: Project progress reports
3.2.2 Natural resources that are managed under a sustainable use, 
conservation, access and benefit-sharing regime:
(a) Hectares of seascape with directly improved management of 
invasive alien species and enhanced ecosystem resilience 
Baseline:0
Target: 94,800 hectares
Data source: Project reports, MoAF (b) Area under sustainable land management 
Baseline: 638,923 hectares
Target: 652,173 hectares
Data Source: Project Reports, MoAF Database 
Output 3.3 Solutions developed, financed and applied at scale for 
energy efficiency and transformation to clean energy and low-
carbon development
3.3.1 Number of proposals developed by UNDP assistance for 
preparation of regulatory frameworks on low-cost energy-efficient 
wooden buildings
Baseline: 1
Target: 3 
Data source: Standard and Guidelines by MoEUDP/DCP/TUR
9491 13
scale:
(a) Growth in installed base of power generation from clean and/or 
renewable energy sources
Baseline:0.2 megawatts
Target: 30 megawatts of renewable energy capacity 
Data source: MoAF database
(b) Existing financing mechanism applied at scale/innovative financing 
models to promote energy efficiency and clean energy
Baseline: 0
Target: Two finance mechanisms, two innovative approaches
Data source: Project progress reports.
(c) Reduction in greenhouse gas emissions due to more efficient energy 
solutions
Baseline:0
Target: 3,092,000 tons
Data Source: Project progress reports
Output 3.4 Chemicals and waste prevented, managed and 
disposed of in an environmentally sound manner in crisis and 
non-crisis urban settings 
3.4.1 Number of interventions on waste management to strengthen 
core local public authorities’ functions 
Baseline: 8
Target: 16
Data source: Strategic plans of municipalities, project progress 
reports, donor reports
3.4.2 Number of people accessing basic urban infrastructure through 
UNDP interventions disaggregated by target groups:
Baseline: 307,000
Target: 507,000 (50% men, 50% women, 15% to be Syrian)
Data source: Project progress reports
3.4.3: Tons of hazardous chemicals and waste managed, treated and 
disposed of in an environmentally sound manner
(a) Chemical waste
Baseline:2,762 tons
Target:3,612 tons
Data Source: Project progress reportsDCP/TUR/4
6 20-0
Baseline: 265,000 tons
Target: 885,000 tons
Data source: MoEU reports, environmental impact assessment, 
donor and progress reports 
Output 3.5 Effective coalitions forged around environmental 
challenges and risk-sharing on climate change 
3..5.1 Increase in waste prevention/reuse/recycling rate (combined) 
in Turkey through UNDP waste management interventions
Baseline: 47,250 tons
Target: 131,250 tons
Data Source: Project progress reports
3..5.2 Number of /initiatives to increase public awareness and 
ownership on environmental challenges
Baseline: 18
Target: 132
Data Source: Donor and progress reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: 11
th NDP Axis 5. Rule of Law, Democratization and Good Governance, Sustainable Development Goals 5,10,16,17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4.1: By 2025, governance systems are more transparent, accountable, inclusive and rights-based, with the 
participation of civil society, and judiciary services are improved in quality
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Proportion of Sustainable 
Development Goal 
indicators produced at the 
national level with full 
disaggregation when 
relevant to the target, in 
accordance with the 
Fundamental Principles of 
Official Statistics
Baseline: 43%
Target: 50%
Existence of independent 
national human rights 
institutions in compliance 
with the Paris Principles
Baseline: 0
Target:1
Voluntary national 
review of Turkey
Monitoring framework 
for National Human 
Rights and Equality 
Institution (NHREI) by 
UNDP
4.1 Legislative and policymaking processes at national and local
levels supported to promote participation, transparency and 
accountability
4.1.1 Number of proposals developed by UNDP for preparation of 
legislative and regulatory frameworks that enable civil society to 
engage in public sphere and contribute to sustainable development
Baseline: 0
Target: 9
Data source: Records of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey 
(GNAT), Official Gazette, Ministry of Interior (MoI), Ministry of 
Justice (MoJ)
4.1.2 Number of civil society partners empowered by joint work to 
participate in policymaking
Baseline: 78
Target: 104
Data source: MoI, Union of Municipalities of Turkey (UMT), Civil 
engagement task forces
PSB
MoJ
MoEU
GNAT
Council of Judges and 
Prosecutors 
Justice Academy 
Ombudsman Institution
NHREI
MoFA
Regular $386,000
Other $53,363,813DP/DCP/TUR
9491 1
proportion of prison 
population
Baseline: 21%
Target: 14%
Turkstat
national and local levels
Baseline: 2
Target: 23
Data source: Records of the UMT, Integrity Action Plans, UNDP and 
Court of Cassation sources
Output 4.2 Capacities and functions of judicial system, NHREI, 
Ombudsman Institution strengthened to expand access to justice 
and combat discrimination, with a focus on women and other 
disadvantaged groups
4.2.1 Number of strengthened institutions in line with international 
principles
Baseline: 1
Target: 2
Data source: Monitoring Framework for NHREI, Submissions to the United Nations human rights mechanisms
4.2.2 Number of people who have access to justice
Baseline: 18,234 women
Target: 23,234 women
Data source: Bar Associations’ database
4.2.3 Number of legal and regulatory frameworks adopted with UNDP 
assistance to promote effectiveness and quality of judicial services
Baseline: 4
Target: 7
Data source: Records of the Union of Turkish Bar Associations (UTBA), MoJ, Court of Cassation Sources
Output 4.3 Capacities enhanced for integrated border management 
and security sector reform fully compliant with international 
standards
4.3.1 Amount of land released from anti-personnel mine hazards in the 
border regions of Turkey
Baseline: 24 million square metres
Target: 45 million square metres Data source: Certificates/non-technical survey reports
4.3.2 Number of legislative and regulatory frameworks adopted with 
UNDP assistance to promote efficient and effective security service 
delivery 
Baseline: 1
Target: 7
Data source: Records of the Parliament, Circulars of MoI, Official 
Gazette
Output 4.4 Capacities of institutions strengthened to promote 
women’s rights and policies, including at local level
Ministry of Defence
Turkish Armed Forces 
UMT
Local administrations
UTBA
NGOs
UniversitiesDCP/TUR/4
6 20-0
frameworks and mechanisms adopted with UNDP assistance 
Baseline: 7
Target: 10
Data source: Records of the MoI, MoJ, MoFLSS, UTBA, Bar 
Associations
Output 4.5: Capacities of local and national actors developed for 
enhanced coordination, financing/ analysis of progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals
4.5.1 New data collection/analysis mechanisms providing to monitor 
progress towards the Goals:
Baseline: 3 
Target: 13
Data source: Project progress reports and reports of related public 
institutions (Turkstat, PSB, etc.)
4.5.2 Number of innovative financing frameworks for SDG 
achievement
Baseline:0
Target: 2
Data source: Project progress reports and reports of related public 
institutions (Turkstat, PSB, etc.)
Output 4.6 Use of digital technologies and e-governance enabled 
for improved public services and other government functions
4.6.1 Number of proposals developed by UNDP assistance for 
preparation of frameworks that leverage digital technologies and e-
governance for delivery and monitoring of services 
Baseline: 2 (already in place)
Target: 4 (with additional improvements)
Data source: MoFA sources, Google Analytics and Presidency Digital 
Transformation Office
4.6.2 Number of adopted systems and frameworks for increased 
efficiency and accountability in the public sector
Baseline:2
Target: 4
Data source: Reports of MoEU