File Name: TUV-NREEP-2012-EN
Year: 2012
Country Name: Tuvalu
Country Code: TUV
Category: NREEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2012
Start Year: 2012
End Year: 2020
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Master Plan for Renewable Electricity 
and Energy Efficiency in Tuvalu
Enetise Tutumau 2012-2020Foreword
By: The Honourable Kausea Natano, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Communications, 
Transport & Public Utilities
Te “Palani mo Enetise Tutumau (Renewable Energy Master Plan)” is the outcome of 
the Government of Tuvalu vision made in 2008 for Tuvalu to become 100% renewable 
energy for all its power generation by the end of 2020.
The local name “Enetise Tutumau” is firmly embedded in the Tuvalu’s Energy Strategy 
with the goal to convert Tuvalu’s electricity generation from 100% diesel to 100% 
renewable energy.
This document is directly linked to “Te Kakeega II 2015”, “Te Kaniva (Climate Change 
Policy) 2012” and the “Tuvalu National Energy Policy”. This will guide the Government 
of Tuvalu in the development of renewable energy and energy efficiency to achieve 
Tuvalu’s vision. The development of renewable energy technologies is capital 
intensive and we do not have the resource and capacity to fulfill this vision. It is a 
huge challenge to the Government and with the financial support and assistance of 
the International Community and our Donor Partners, the vision of 100% renewable 
energy by 2020 can be truly achieved.
I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude for the financial 
and technical assistance provided by the New Zealand Government through the 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) for this document to become a reality.Glossary
 ACRONYMS
- BAU Business As Usual
- EE Energy Efficiency
- ET Enetise Tutumau (Tuvaluan for “Steadfast Electricity”)
- ETC Enetise Tutumau Council
- ECC Energy Co-ordination Committee
- GoT Government of Tuvalu
- GDP Gross Domestic Product
- IRR Internal Rate of Return
- LV Low Voltage (230 / 400 VAC)
- MV Medium Voltage (11 kV)
- MFAT New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade 
- NPV Net Present Value
- RE Renewable Energy 
- REEEU Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Unit
- REEE-EEF REEE Educational Equipment Facility
- PPP Purchasing Power Parity (for GDP comparison)
- PRIF Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility
- PWD Public Works Department of Tuvalu
- SIDS Small Island Developing States
- TEC Tuvalu Electricity Corporation
- TISIP Tuvalu Infrastructure Strategy & Investment Plan
- TMTI Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute 
- TTC Tuvalu Telecom Corporation
UNITS
- A$ Australian Dollar (Australian dollars are used in Tuvalu as local currency)
- GWh Gigawatt hour (= 1 million kWh) (unit of electricity consumption) 
- kW kilowatt (unit of power rating – output or demand)
- kWh kilowatt hour (measure of electricity consumption)
- kWp kilowatt peak (unit of peak electricity output) 
- MW Megawatt (= 1000 kW) (unit of power rating – output or demand)Table of Contents
ENETISE TUTUMAU 2012 - 2020
Master Plan for Renewable Electricity and Energy Efficiency in Tuvalu
 Foreword
Executive Summary i
1.0 INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 Acknowledgement 1
1.2 Tuvalu’s Commitment 1
1.3 Purpose 2
1.4 Plan Objectives 3
2.0 TUVALU’S PATH TOWARDS 100% RENEWABLE ENERGY 4
2.1 Renewable Electricity Technology 5
2.2 Renewable Electricity Investment Programme 5
2.3 Outer Islands 7
2.4 Energy Efficiency 8
2.5 The 1000 Solar Roof Programme 8
3.0 BACKGROUND 9
3.1 Geography 9
3.2 Population Trends 10
3.3 Use of Electricity 11
3.4 International Comparison 13
3.5 FUTURE ELECTRICITY REQUIREMENTS 13
4.0 EXISTING GENERATION INFRASTRUCTURE 15
5.0 RENEWABLE ELECTRICITY 17
5.1 DEVELOPMENT 17
5.2 SOLAR ENERGY 17
5.3 WIND GENERATION 19
5.4 GRID STABILITY 20
5.5 DEMAND MANAGEMENT 20Table of Contents
ENETISE TUTUMAU 2012 - 2020
Master Plan for Renewable Electricity and Energy Efficiency in Tuvalu
6.0 ENERGY EFFICIENCY 21
6.1 Public Education 21
6.2 High User Energy Audits 23
6.3 Technology Improvements 24
6.4 Demand Side Management 26
7.0 ENERGY ECONOMICS IN TUVALU 27
7.1 Diesel 27
7.2 Solar Generation 28
7.3 Wind Generation 28
7.4 Bio-Diesel 29
7.5 Energy Efficiency 29
7.6 Economic Analysis 30
8.0 IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY 34
8.1 Funding 34
8.2 Capacity Building 34
8.3 Policy and Regulations 35
 References 38
SOLAR ENERGY CONCEPTS A
GRID ISSUES B
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS C
TUVALU ELECTRICITY CORPORATION DATA D
EXTRACT FROM TUVALU NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY E
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX B
APPENDIX C
APPENDIX D
APPENDIX EExecutive Summary
This Master Plan outlines the way forward to generate electricity from renewable energy and to 
develop an energy efficiency programme in Tuvalu. 
Tuvalu has two stated goals:
• To generate electricity with 100% renewable energy by 2020
• To increase energy efficiency on Funafuti by 30%. 
To meet these ambitious targets, Tuvalu must develop 6 MW renewable energy electricity 
generation capacity in the next eight years. The initial capital cost of solar arrays, wind turbines and 
batteries to replace the current energy demand is estimated to be A$52 million.
Currently Tuvalu is using 1.76 million litres of diesel fuel per year at a cost of A$1.50/litre, most of 
which is used to generate electricity. By the end of 2012, the output capacity of renewable energy 
electricity generation using PV technology totalled 146 kW (peak) with a further 66 kW expected 
to be commissioned early 2013. However, in terms of electricity production, diesel generation still 
provides 95% of the total. Large scale conversion to renewable electricity and implementation of 
energy efficiency improvements will reduce the diesel demand. Given the steady and continuing 
increase in the price of diesel oil, the renewable electricity and energy efficiency programme will 
not only be cost effective but will ensure that affordable electricity is available to the people of 
Tuvalu.
It is estimated that following the completion of the renewable electricity and energy efficiency 
programme, the use of the diesel generator plant will reduce by up to 95% with a consequent 
reduction in diesel fuel consumption. Savings in diesel fuel over the 30 year life of the overall 
programme are estimated to be A$152 million (2011 dollars) assuming oil prices continue to 
increase at the current long term trend. After allowing for battery replacements and other 
maintenance, which are estimated to cost A$115 million, the net saving over the 30 year 
programme will be A$37 million. 
Renewable Energy Programme
To meet the above objectives, electricity will be generated using renewable energy in all the nine 
islands of Tuvalu. The Outer Islands1 will be developed as a priority because fuel transportation 
from Funafuti increases the cost of generation and has environmental risks associated with potential 
fuel spill. Furthermore, the Outer Islands generate 18 hours a day (rather than 24 hours) and the 
power systems are less reliable. 
On Fogafale, the main island of Funafuti atoll, due to the high population density, available land 
is scarce and ground-mounting of the proposed photovoltaic (PV) arrays that will form the major 
component of the renewable electricity system is not considered practicable. In order to provide the 
required area for the PV arrays, in 2011 the General Manager of the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation 
(TEC) announced the “1000 Solar Roof Programme”. In this programme, about half of the current 
roof space of the buildings in Funafuti will be occupied by PV arrays. In the case of the Outer Islands 
where more ground space is availableit is likely that a mix of roof mounted and ground mounted Executive Summary
Initially the renewable electricity programme in Funafuti will comprise of the installation of PV 
arrays with battery storage because this technology is well proven in Tuvalu. In the early stages 
of the programme, a detailed investigation will examine the feasibility of wind turbine generation 
in Funafuti as wind generation could offer significant technical and economic benefits. Subject 
to no insurmountable problems being identified, wind turbines will be installed from about 2015 
onwards as a wind-solar mix will optimise the level of battery storage required and the level of diesel 
generation required.
The system will require standby diesel generation to provide a back-up to the renewable energy when 
prolonged weather conditions limit renewable energy generation. Conversion or replacement of the 
existing diesel generators to run on bio-diesel fuel is proposed to take place in the last stage of the 
renewable electricity programme. It is estimated that 5% of the annual electricity production will be 
supplied from bio-diesel generation. 
Energy Efficiency Programme
Energy efficiency improvements will be initially targeted on Funafuti. Funafuti has a higher power 
demand per capita than the outer islands and also consumes 85% of the electricity generated by the 
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (TEC). Meeting the 30% target will allow Tuvalu to maintain current 
generation levels over the next eight years at 2% annual growth of GDP. The energy efficiency 
programme will include public education, energy audits and technology improvements.
Programme Support
The TEC will increase resources and capacity to manage the capital investment programme. During 
the implementation of the programme, TEC will increase staff numbers by up to 10 to undertake 
project management, administration, and promotion activities.
Full government support will be necessary to facilitate a smooth implementation. This support will 
include setting policy and passing legislation, and promulgating rules and regulations. The 1000 Solar 
Roof Programme will need particular support from the Government and new policies around access 
and ownership. As a first step, in 2012, the Cabinet gave approval for the use of the government 
building rooftop for the installation of PV arrays.
Funding
In order to enable a planned approach to implementation, Tuvalu is seeking a steady funding stream 
and a long-term commitment by donors for the investment plan. The funding could be arranged as 
co-funding amongst a group of nations. The estimated finance is A$6.5 million per year from 2013 to 
2020.Introduction
1.0
1.1 Acknowledgement
The Government of Tuvalu and the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (TEC) gratefully acknowledge 
the funding of this Plan by the New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT).The 
Government of Tuvalu and the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation also acknowledge the contribution 
of the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), the Pacific Island Advisory Centre (PIAC) and 
the Deutsche Gesellschaft fuer Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) to the review and finalisation 
of the Master Plan. The Government of Tuvalu and the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (TEC) also 
acknowledge the input of AECOM New Zealand in the preparation of this Plan.
1.2 Tuvalu’s Commitment
In his statement to the 55th Session of the UN General Assembly on 5 September 2000, on the 
Admission of Tuvalu to the United Nations, the late Prime Minister of Tuvalu, The Hon. Ionatana 
Ionatana said:
 “…We are concerned about global climate change, and the consequences of atmospheric warming, 
in particular rising sea levels. World-wide, carbon dioxide emissions are still increasing. Emission 
targets are not being met. We urge the members of the United Nations family, in accordance with 
the Kyoto Protocol, to combat this threat more aggressively…before it is too late. …In joining the 
United Nations, we want to build a stronger international identity. We want to strengthen old 
friendships and forge new relationships with Member States far and wide. We will uphold the noble 
ideals of the UN, and pledge our contribution to the promotion of progress, prosperity, and peace. 
…”
The Tuvalu National Energy Policy, 2009 states:
“By the year 2020, guided by the principles in the “Te Kakeega II” and the “Malefatunga 
Declaration”, Tuvalu shall attain a prosperous living standard that is fostered through an energy 
policy that promotes the provision of socially, financially, economically, technically, politically and 
environmentally sustainable energy systems and [is] within the framework of the Tuvalu Initial 
National Communication under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change (Oct 1999).”
At a Ministerial Conference of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) on “Achieving Sustainable 
Energy for All in SIDS – Challenges, Opportunities, Commitments” in Bridgetown, Barbados, May 
7-8, 2012, the Minister of Communications, Transport and Public Utilities, The Honourable Kausea 
Natano, communicated his vision and Tuvalu’s commitment as follows:
“Tuvalu, in partnership with the Governments of Australia, Denmark, New Zealand, Norway, 
the United Kingdom, and UNDP commits itself to:
a) Power Generation – 100% renewable energy by 2020
b) Implementation Principles:
 • Photovoltaic (PV)- 60 – 95% of demand 
 • Wind 0 – 40% of demand (if feasible) 
• Biodiesel 5% of demand (import) This commitment was endorsed by the Prime Minister of Tuvalu, The Hon. Willy Telavi, at the Rio+20 
Conference in June 2012, and it is a priority for the nation. Tuvalu is now calling for its development 
partners to stand by the nation and assist in the implementation of the Tuvalu Energy Policy and in 
the achievement of 100% renewable energy-based electricity generation by 2020.
Renewable Energy has a high profile with donors and within Tuvalu, and is a cornerstone of Tuvalu’s 
development objectives. The Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility (PRIF) confirmed in its Tuvalu 
Infrastructure Strategy & Investment Plan (TISIP) Report (2012) the priority of the power sector 
development until 2016 with the Energy Sector projects P3 and P2 ranking number 1 and 2 priority 
respectively.
1.3 Purpose
This Master Plan outlines the way forward to generate electricity from renewable resources 
(“renewable electricity”) and to develop an energy efficiency programme in Tuvalu. This Master 
Plan is intended for use by the Government of Tuvalu (GoT), the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation 
(TEC), potential donors, community representatives and other relevant stakeholders. It is a working 
document and will be regularly reviewed and updated as new information becomes available.
The purpose of this document is to:
a) Outline the technical concepts;
b) Review the economic feasibility; and
c) Propose an implementation programme.
The Master Plan is the first step in the process that will lead to implementation and will be followed 
by (in order):
• Pre-Feasibility Studies that will review the technical concepts and economic feasibility, and 
identify the least-cost options to achieve the stated goals in the Master Plan.
• Feasibility Studies that fully evaluate and confirm the least-cost options identified in the 
Pre-Feasibility Studies - including economic feasibility and preparation of a detailed 
implementation programme.
• Implementation. 
Introduction
1.01.0
Introduction
1.4 Plan Objectives
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (REEE) are at the centre of this Master Plan. Energy 
efficiency is included because the reduced electricity demand from energy efficiency measures 
will result in a reduced requirement for new generation capability thereby reducing both capital 
and operating costs. Typically this can be expected to provide good cost-benefits and maintain 
the affordability of electricity to the people of Tuvalu. Due to the low energy demand of the 
Outer Islands, it is proposed that the focus of the energy efficiency programme should commence 
on Funafuti where electricity consumption is relatively high, followed by progressive and rapid 
implementation on the Outer Islands.
The priorities for the electricity sector in Tuvalu are:
a) To provide a reliable and affordable electricity supply to all the people of Tuvalu;
b) To safeguard Tuvalu from future diesel price shocks;
c) To improve the efficiency of electricity utilisation and further reduce the already low energy 
consumption per person and per GDP; and
d) To reduce Tuvalu’s “carbon footprint” and become an international role model with regard to 
climate change mitigation.Tuvalu’s Path towards 100% 
Renewable Energy
As a first step in a path towards100% renewable energy, the G.O.T has set two goals:
• To generate electricity using 100% renewable energy by 2020
• To increase energy efficiency by 30% on Funafuti and later in the Outer Islands.
This Master Plan provides the framework for the achievement of these goals, which it is estimated 
will require a total renewable electricity generation capacity of 6 MW involving a capital investment 
of A$52 million. 
By the end of 2020, the objective of the renewable electricity generation programme is that 95% of 
total electricity needs will be supplied from a mix of solar and wind energy sources. The percentage 
to be provided by each of the two technologies is still to be determined, but the initially, new 
generation is expected to be PV while wind generation is further investigated. 
There will be a requirement for supplementary generation to provide a back-up to the renewable 
electricity generation when prolonged weather conditions limit electricity generation from PV or 
wind. Subject to technical and economic feasibility, conversion or replacement of existing diesel 
generators to run on bio-diesel is planned to take place during the last stage of the renewable 
electricity programme. It is estimated that 5% of the annual energy demand will be supplied from 
bio-diesel in 2020. 
Risks include the failure to meet the energy efficiency targets set out in this Master Plan or 
significant growth in GDP, either of which will require either increased investment in renewable 
electricity generation over that included in this Master Plan, or continued reliance on diesel 
generation.
The key elements of the renewable electricity programme are:
1) Development of renewable electricity generation supplemented with batteries initially on 
the Outer Islands ;
2) The provision of additional renewable electricity generation capacity on Funafuti; 
3) The implementation of an energy efficiency programme on Funafuti initially followed by a 
programme on the Outer Islands;
4) Conversion of supplementary generation from diesel to bio-diesel fuel.
The chosen renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies will be: 
• Safe, proven, reliable and sustainable;
• Consistent in type wherever possible to simplify operations, maintenance and spare parts 
management; 
• Cost-effective over the technical life of the equipment; and
• Socially, environmentally and culturally acceptable. 
Tuvalu’s Path towards 100% 
Renewable Energy
2.0Tuvalu’s Path towards 100% 
Renewable Energy
2.1 Renewable Electricity Technology
PV generation has been in operation in Funafuti since 2008 and in Vaitupu since 2009 and the 
performance of the generation plant has been satisfactory.
The wind resource has been assessed on Funafuti and is now being assessed in Nukufetau. It is 
recognised that a mix of PV and wind generation would have the potential to minimise the level of 
battery storage and use of generation from diesel or biodiesel fuels. Initial studies indicate wind 
turbines can also offer a sound economic option but that a number of technical and environmental 
issues need to be investigated. These issues will be investigated over the period 2013 to 2015 
including further wind monitoring and if favourable, wind generation will commence during 2015. 
2.2 Renewable Electricity Investment Programme
The programme was developed taking into consideration the following:
a) To be initially designed to cover the existing energy demand assuming energy efficiency 
improvements;
b) Steady funding streams being available from 2013 to 2020;
c) The introduction of renewable electricity on the Outer Islands a priority for economic and 
environmental reasons as discussed in 2.3 below.
The Renewable Electricity programme above shows the existing installations as of 2012, and also 
those planned for installation during the period 2013 to 2020. Details are provided in the table on 
the following page.
2.0Tuvalu’s Path towards 100% 
Renewable Energy
2.0
Table 2-1 Description of Annual RE Installations
PERIOD PROGRAMME
2012 - 66 kWp grid-connected PV for the desalination plant in Funafuti 
 (funded by Japan) – under construction.
- 40 kWp grid-connected PV, Funafuti (Russia funded)
- 9kWp solar PV standalone for desalination plant in Funafuti (funded by 
 AUSAid/UK/USA – completed
2013 - Phase 1: Outer Islands PV generation with battery storage and diesel backup 
 – Nukulaelae, Nukufetau, Nui
- Phase 2: Outer Island PV generation with battery storage and diesel backup 
 – Nanumea, Nanumaga, Niutao.
- Phase 2: Funafuti 1 PV generation with central battery storage (~ 600 kWp)
- Phase 2: Wind generation investigation on Funafuti. 
- 4 kWp PV array on demonstration fale in Funafuti (funded by UNDP (SIDS-DOC)
2014 - Completion of Phase 1 Outer Island PV.
- Completion of Phase 2 Outer Island PV
- Completion of Phase 2: Funafuti PV generation.
- Further grid-connected PV generation in Funafuti. 
- 12 kWp PV supplying an institution (TMTI) located on Funafuti (Finland funded).
2015 - Outer Islands PV generation – Phase 3: third stage of PV generation on Vaitupu 
 (PV with battery storage).
- Outer Islands PV generation – Phase 3: PV generation on Niulakita.
- ~300 kW wind generation on Funafuti 
2016 to 
2020
Up to 750 kWp of renewable electricity generation capacity each year on Funafuti, 
comprising PV and possibly wind generation.
Funding this programme as one package rather than as a series of individual packages will provide 
Tuvalu with a steady funding stream and a long-term commitment by donors for the implementation 
of the investment plan. The funding could be arranged as co-funding amongst a group of nations. 
The estimated finance is A$6.5 million per year from 2013 to 2020. If this combined sum is not 
available, Tuvalu will need to adopt a flexible programme to reflect local GDP development and 
donor conditions.
Figure 2.1 over represents the programme in terms of the cumulative total of renewable electricity 
capacity installed.Tuvalu’s Path towards 100% 
Renewable Energy
2.3 Outer Islands
Priority is to be given in the renewable electricity programme to implementation on the Outer 
Islands for the following reasons:
• Transporting the diesel fuel now used for electricity generation is expensive as it has to be 
transported in drums.
• The risk of diesel spill during the ship to shore handling process is high.
• To reduce the cost of generation, the supply is now turned off for a period overnight.
While the capital investment required on a per capita basis is higher on the Outer Islands than on 
Funafuti owing to the logistics of implementation, the electricity demand of the Outer Islands is only 
16% of the national total and has relatively little impact. While it is anticipated that the availability 
of 24 hour electricity will result in an increase in electricity consumption per capita, it is assumed 
that this will be counter-balanced by the energy efficiency programme.
The generation systems in the Outer Islands must be reliable and use simple and proven technology. 
Equipment will be modular using “off the shelf” components, safe to operate and capable of remote 
monitoring by TEC from Funafuti. The system installed in Vaitupu in 2009 has these characteristics. 
A common technology will be adopted for all of the Outer Islands using PV generation with battery 
storage with the existing diesel generators providing the necessary back-up (solar-battery-diesel 
hybrid) and the design will be based on the mini-grid model design developed for MFAT. The existing 
distribution systems will be retained. 
Figure 2-1 Cumulative total of renewable electricity capacity installed.
2.0
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Total RE installedkWpeak
Vaitupu
Outer Islands Phase 2
Outer Islands Phase 1
FunafutiTuvalu’s Path towards 100% 
Renewable Energy
2.4 Energy Efficiency
Funafuti will be the initial target for energy efficiency improvements. Funafuti has a higher power 
demand per capita than the outer islands and also consumes about 85% of the electricity generated 
by TEC. Furthermore, it will be easier for energy efficiency capability to be developed on Funafuti 
and that capability made available for the progressive introduction of energy efficiency programmes 
on the Outer Islands. Meeting the 30% target will allow Tuvalu to maintain current generation levels 
over the next eight years at 2% annual growth of GDP. 
The Energy Efficiency programme will consist of public education, energy audits, practical 
demonstrations and technology improvements.
2.5 The 1000 Solar Roof Programme
 Potential “solar roofs” in Funafuti
High efficiency solar modules, using on mono- or poly-crystalline technology with approximately 
140 W/m2 peak generation capacity are proposed for Funafuti to reduce the required area for the 
solar arrays.
 Announcement of “Tuvalu 1000 Solar Roof 
 Programme at TEC in 2011
2.0
A central component of this Master Plan is the 1000 Solar 
Roof Programme, which was announced in 2011 by the 
General Manager of TEC. Due to the high population 
density in Funafuti, there is insufficient land unavailable 
for ground-mounting of PV arrays. Therefore, in order to 
meet the anticipated electricity generation requirements, 
it is estimated that about half of the roof space of the 
approximately 1,000 buildings in Funafuti will need to be 
used for the installation of the PV arrays. If affordable
About 95% of the roofs in Funafuti are clad with corrugated 
iron with minimum structural support and are unlikely to 
meet cyclone-proof criteria. It is likely that most of the roofs 
in Funafuti where it is planned to install PV modules, will 
need to be structurally reinforced or replaced with heavier 
roofs capable of supporting the PV modules, and to meet 
cyclone criteria. In parallel with the preparation of this 
Master Plan a building survey has been carried out to assess 
the level of building strengthening work necessary. The 
findings are summarised in Appendix A. This is a significant 
social, economic and environmental impact, which will 
require community consultation and support. Legislation will
electricity is to continue to be available in the future then this is a simple benchmark that people can 
relate to and helps TEC demonstrate to its customers the relevance and importance of this technology.
also be required to address land ownership and access issues that will arise with the programme. Background
Figure 3-1 Map showing location of Tuvalu
3.1 Geography
Tuvalu, formerly known as the Ellice Islands, is located about 1,200 km north of Fiji. It is a sovereign 
nation country consisting of nine low-lying atolls and islands and the population are mainly of 
Polynesian ethnicity. This is reflected in the culture and customs of Tuvalu. Being only four metres 
above sea level at its highest points, Tuvalu is vulnerable to the impact of rising sea levels caused by 
global warming.
Tuvalu lies within the trade wind zone but on the edge of the South-west Pacific equatorial doldrum 
zone. Wind speeds are typically in the order of 10 knots. Although tropical cyclones occasionally 
develop in the vicinity of Tuvalu, hurricane force winds are rare in Tuvalu. However, while rare, 
destructive cyclones have been experienced in Tuvalu and cannot be discounted in the future.
3.0Temperatures are uniformly high all year round with the mean annual temperature approximately 
28 deg C. Sunshine hours are shown in the following chart.
Further details are on:
http://www.weather-and-climate.com/average-monthly-Rainfall-TemperatureSunshine,Funafuti,Tuvalu
3.2 Population Trends
The majority of the population of Tuvalu live on Funafuti owing to a steady migration from the Outer 
Islands and an overall natural population growth. 
Figure 3-2 Population trends in Tuvalu
Background
3.0There is a discrepancy between population figures recorded by the World Bank Database, CIA 
Factbook and the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation. Population figures (2011) from the World Bank 2
have been used in the analysis of this report.
3.3 Use of Electricity
The dependence of the Tuvaluan people on electricity in their daily lives has only developed since 
the 1980s when electricity became widely available. Electricity has now become an essential 
requirement for electronic communications, refrigeration and air conditioning. Electricity 
consumption varies across Tuvalu with per capita consumption on Funafuti being approximately five 
times that of Outer Islands. Table 3-1 over refers to this.
Figure 3.3 over shows the increase in electricity generated in Tuvalu over the last 15 years. Over this 
period, the population of Tuvalu has grown at 0.4% per annum, GDP by an average of 3% per annum 
and energy use by around 6% per annum. The rate of energy use per GDP has also grown in this 
period.
The apparent growth of electricity consumption in 2010 was mainly attributed to improved 
metering and a new billing system that TEC introduced in that year.
Table 3-1 Electricity Demand and Supply by Tuvalu’s Nine Atolls and Islands – 2010
** 2007 population Source: Tuvalu Electricity Corporation
Background
3.0
Atoll Population Land area 
(km2)
Population 
density 
(persons/km2)
Peak 
Generation 
(kW)
Annual 
Generation 
(kWh)
Electricity use 
per person 
(kWh)
Funafuti 5,156 2.79 1,848 1000 4,997,501 969
Nanumea 779 3.87 201 37 110,280 142
Nanumaga 687 2.78 247 37 115,000 167
Niutao 773 2.53 305 39 110,000 142
Nui 618 2.83 218 31 120,000 194
Vaitupu 1863 5.60 332 95 293,876 158
Nukufetau 688 2.99 230 38 120,000 174
Nukulaelae 457 1.28 357 20 70,000 153
Niulakita 41 0.42 98
TOTAL 11,062** 25 442 1,297 5,936,657Figure 3-3 Power Generation vs GDP and Population
Background
3.03.4 International Comparison
Figure 3.4 compares electricity consumption in Tuvalu with that of other neighbouring South Pacific 
island countries. It is noted that per capita electricity consumption in Tuvalu is in the same order as 
for Samoa and Tonga.
Figure 3-4 Comparative Electricity Consumption Data for South Pacific Island Countries
Sources: Cook Islands Statistics Office (2012), Fiji Islands Bureau of Statistics (2010), Kiribati National 
Statistics Office (2012), Niue Statistics (2012), Samoa Bureau of Statistics (2012), Tonga Department of 
Statistics (2012), Tuvalu Central Statistics Department (2008),Tuvalu Electricity Corporation.
3.5 Future Electricity Requirements
The future electricity demand will depend on a number of factors including:
• Population;
• Availability of supply on Outer Islands;
• Growth of income (GDP);
• Use of electricity;
• Affordability of appliances; and
• Electricity tariffs.
Historically, electricity usage increased at an average rate of 0.14GWh per year between 2002 and 
2009. If the trend continued, electricity usage would increase to 7.2GWh by 2020 and 10GWh by 
2030. 
Background
3.0The Government of Tuvalu has an energy efficiency target to increase energy efficiency in Funafuti 
by 30% over the next eight years. If successful, this programme could result in a nil increase in 
electricity demand over the period and electricity usage would remain at 6GWh in 2020. This is 
equivalent to saving 1.5 million kWh of generated electricity in eight years at the current GDP. 
This is an ambitious target considering that in the past electricity demand has grown at a rate 
of about 6% per annum, while GDP only grew at about 2.5%. If the projected saving cannot be 
achieved, more renewable energy capacity will be needed.
The following graph shows the Master Plan Electricity Forecast based on this saving against the 
‘business as usual’ forecast if no energy efficiencies are made. The graph also depicts the change 
from diesel generation to renewable energy generation over the next eight years as the programme 
is implemented.
Figure 3-5 Electricity Forecast
Background
3.0Tuvalu’s current electricity systems consist of centralised diesel generators with associated medium 
and low voltage distribution networks. All central electricity generators and distribution networks 
are owned and operated by the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (TEC).
The distribution networks on Funafuti and Vaitupu are made up of medium voltage (11 kV) and 
low voltage (400/230 V) systems while the systems on the remaining islands are low voltage only. 
An exception is the smallest island, Niulakita, where the supply to the 40 inhabitants is limited 
to a number of solar modules used for the charging of batteries. One islet of the Funafuti Atoll, 
Amatuku, where Tuvalu Maritime Training Institute (TMTI) is located, is supplied by a diesel 
generator while the four families living on another islet of the Funafuti Atoll rely on solar modules to 
meet the needs of low energy equipment.
Table 4-1 Existing Key Power Systems
*Estimated energy values Source: Tuvalu Electricity Corporation
Existing Generation 
Infrastructure 
4.0
Atoll Existing Power Systems Age Existing distribution 
network
Net 
generation
(kWh)
Fuel 
Consumed 
(1000 l)
Funafuti 3 600kW Generator Sets Dec 2006 11kV and 230/400V AC 
networks
4,997,500 1,423
Nanumea 3 generator sets Dec 1999 230/400V AC Network 110,280 45
Nanumaga* 3 generator sets Dec 1999 230/400V AC Network 115,000 45
Niutao* 3 generator sets Jan 2000 230/400V AC Network 110,000 49
Nui* 3 generator sets Nov 1999 230/400V AC Network 120,000 47
Vaitupu 3 generator sets Nov 1999 11kV and 230/400V AC 
networks
293,876 81
Nukufetau* 3 generator sets Nov 1999 230/400V AC Network 120,000 42
Nukulaelae* 3 generator sets Oct 1999 230/400V AC Network 70,000 31
Niulakita No island network
Diesel Total 5,936,657 1,763
Vaitupu 46 kWp hybrid PV/battery/diesel 2009 230/400 VAC 69,800 -
Funafuti 40kWp PV array 2008 230 / 400 VAC 60,400 -
Funafuti 42kWp PV array 2012 230 / 400 VAC
Funafuti 66kWp PV array associated with 
desalination plant
Under 
construction
Note. This plant is not yet 
installed
Funafuti 9 kWp PV array 2012 Standalone
PV Total 130,200Currently it is assessed that annually 130,000kWh are generated by the two existing PV arrays 
which amounts to approximately 2% of total generation. No data is yet available for the 2012 PV 
installations.
TEC propose to install a generator load dispatch system at the Fogafale power generation station. 
This software controlled system is expected to improve the fuel efficiency of the diesel generators, 
translating into direct cash savings for TEC. Furthermore, as the output from the diesel generators 
decreases as the renewable electricity input increases, improved dispatch control will become 
essential.
Existing Generation 
Infrastructure
4.05.1 Development
The development of the renewable electricity programme and required investment is staged over a 
period of eight years, and is planned to be completed by the end of 2020. The staging provides the 
following advantages:
a) Donor finance will be spread over eight years.
b) The systems are modular and will grow in complexity with time.
c) Local capacity will continuously grow with each project, and TEC will be able to specify, 
procure and manage future projects by initially supplementing and ultimately substituting 
overseas expertise.
d) Local designs such as solar roofs will improve with time and experience.
e) Technology will develop as international suppliers learn from global experience.
f) Technology costs will continue to reduce.
g) “Simple” and proven technologies can be installed first; more complex technologies can be 
installed later.
The plan must remain flexible to best meet funding and supply opportunities and should be 
reviewed annually. Ideally, after an initial ramp-up, the development would be spread evenly over 
the remaining years to allow TEC and the people of Tuvalu to adjust to the proposed work-load and 
to the changes in the urban environment. 
A key design principle is the installation of modular technology, meaning that the systems will 
consist of many small building blocks that can be added over time. On this basis, the systems can 
grow steadily without a need for significant changes of the design. 
5.2 Solar Energy
In the last decade, PV technology has made huge advances in terms of improved efficiency, reduced 
cost and increased market acceptance, particularly in remote locations where diesel generation is 
the only alternative. The main benefits are the low maintenance and operation costs. 
Renewable Electricity
5.0Existing Installations
 PV solar panels at the secondary school in 
 Vaitupu, peak output 184 W/m2
PV has been proven to perform well with the first 40 kWp grid-connected array in Funafuti, installed 
in 2008 and the battery-backed 46 kWp system on Vaitupu installed in 2009. Earlier small scale 
PV arrays installed by the Tuvalu Telecom Corporation (TTC) in 1994, have also demonstrated the 
durability of PV equipment.
Capacity Factor
The capacity factor for PV arrays is defined as the actual energy produced in kWh over a year as a 
ratio of the theoretical capacity of the plant if it was exposed to full sunshine for 24 hours every day 
of the year. 
The 40 kWp solar plant on Funafuti is grid-connected and all the electricity generated is supplied 
into the network thereby directly reducing the diesel generation required. No batteries are 
provided for energy storage as the maximum electricity output from the PV array injected into the 
network is less than 10% of the typical electricity demand. As a consequence, the diesel generator 
plant can absorb any fluctuations from the varying level of PV injection due to cloud movement. A 
capacity factor of 16.5% in 2009 and 16.2% in 2010 was calculated from the available data. 
The other PV array in Tuvalu, funded by Italy and Austria, has an output of 46 kWp and is located on 
the island of Vaitupu in 2009. This installation includes a large battery bank with a three-day storage 
capacity. The average annual net capacity factor in 2010 was calculated at 17.2%.
The performance of solar arrays reduces with time as the equipment ages. Typically a 15% drop-off 
in performance is experienced over the 25-year life of the plant. On this basis, it can be expected 
that the average performance in terms of electricity output over the 25 years will be about 93% of 
the rated output. Furthermore, as the ideal sites are used up, the remaining sites may involve some 
unavoidable shading that will reduce the capacity factor. On this basis, an average, long-term net 
iff 15% d ihdllif hPV 
Renewable Electricity
5.0
There are five PV installations in Tuvalu currently in operation or 
under construction: 
• 40 kWp grid connected PV array on Funafuti, 
installed in 2008;
• 42kWp grid connected PV array on Funafuti 
installed in 2012
• 46 kWp PV-battery-diesel hybrid system on Vaitupu 
installed in 2009. 
• 66 kWp grid-connected PV array associated with the 
new desalination plant currently under construction 
on Funafuti
• 9kWp standalone solar PV array associated with another 
desalination plant was installed in 2012. 
• There are also a small number of home-based PV
installations (dates unknown) on the small, most 
southern island of Niulakita. 5.3 Wind Generation
The South East Trade winds provide Tuvalu with a steady wind flow for about nine months of the year. 
These winds are quite reliable day and night and therefore provide an opportunity for the use of wind 
turbines to generate electricity that supplements PV generation that is only available during the daytime. However, the wind resource varies over the nine islands of Tuvalu with the general trend being 
a reduction the closer the island is to the equator.
Wind resource testing was undertaken by TEC at a point close to the power station on Fogafale in 
2008 and 2009. The measurement of the wind resource was carried out at a height of 29m and the 
results of these tests were encouraging with a capacity factor of greater than 18%. The results of the 
tests are summarised in Table 5-1 below. 
Table 5-1 Evaluation of Wind in Funafuti
Tuvalu is located at the north-eastern fringe of the tropical cyclone zone that stretches from about 
10o to 35o south and from eastern Australia to about 180o east. These cyclones tend to be more 
frequent in the west of this area, grow in strength and reach their peak wind velocities at about 20o 
south. The storms typically rotate clockwise and hit Tuvalu from the north-west. Historically, the 
frequency of cyclones hitting Tuvalu is about one in 25 years. 
Wind generation presents a number technical challenges for Tuvalu and these are 
summarised below:
a) The tropical marine environment which increases the risk of corrosion;
b) The limited space on Fogafale due the high density of urban development and the presence 
of the airport; 
c) The need for specialist maintenance equipment and maintenance staff training.
d) Occasional cyclones with wind speeds of above 180km/h.
Wind generation offers a good opportunity to supplement PV generation and to reduce both the 
level of battery storage required and generation from biodiesel. The optimum size ranges and 
configurations require careful consideration. Concerns regarding wear and tear, corrosion and 
maintainability need to be addressed before wind generation is introduced into the renewable 
electricity mix. Should investigations prove positive, these issues will be addressed during the first two 
f hh hbf dd fd
5.0
Renewable Electricity
Frequency and Mean Wind Speed : Funafuti 2008 -2009
Direction N NNE ENE E ESE SSE S SS
W
WS
W
W WN
W
NN
W
Frequenc
y
3.3
%
5.8
%
8.5
%
13.3
%
26.3
%
27.5
%
5.5
%
1.5
%
1.2% 2.1
%
2.7% 2.4
%
Mean 
velocity 
(m/s)
4.57 4.55 4.42 4.69 6.2 7.06 5.65 3.49 3.73 5.17 6.41Figure 5.1 shows possible wind turbine locations in Funafuti.
Figure 5-1 Potential Wind Turbine Locations- Funafuti
5.4 Grid Stability
The maintenance of electricity grid stability as the levels of renewable electricity injection increase 
will be addressed early in the programme. Renewable electricity generation is subject to relatively 
rapid changes in generation output. This is caused by passing clouds in the case of PV generation, 
and wind velocity fluctuations in the case of wind generation. Primary grid stability will be provided 
by the batteries. In the case of Funafuti, preliminary analysis indicates that with the existing diesel 
generators, it may be possible to develop 400 kWp renewable electricity generation before batteries 
will be required to maintain stability. Further discussion is provided in Appendix B. 
5.5 Demand Management
Automatic or manual demand management will be required to balance fluctuations of power supply 
at times of high or low wind and sunshine or when the capacity of batteries is running low. An 
approach will be developed by TEC as a priority early in the programme involving remote demand 
Renewable Electricity
5.0Improved energy efficiency is a critical component the Master Plan and along with renewable 
electricity, increased energy efficiency is essential if Tuvalu’s energy goals are to be achieved. 
Reduced demand means that less expenditure is required on renewable generable plant while 
reduced consumption means that householders and businesses do not need to spend as much on the 
purchase of electricity. While this is a simple message, the implementation could be difficult. 
As an important step in improving energy efficiency, the Government has recently approved 
the implementation of labelling and standards for appliances such as freezers/refrigerators, air 
conditioners and lighting. This will ensure that only energy efficient appliances are sold in the local 
market. The programme is funded by the Australian Government and implemented by SPC.
Energy efficiency improvements will be targeted on Funafuti initially. Funafuti has a higher power 
demand per capita and also consumes 85% of the electricity generated by TEC.
The Energy Efficiency programme, led by the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Unit (REEEU) of 
TEC, will have a range of actions, including:
• Public education through printed media, radio and school programmes;
• Energy audits for major consumers;
• Trials and demonstrations on-site at TEC through the Energy Efficiency Demonstration Fale; 
• Implemented projects throughout the community; and
• TEC advice to the general public on technology choices including the benefits of energy 
efficient household appliances.
• In 2012, the Cabinet endorsed the adoption by Tuvalu of the Pacific Appliance Labelling 
Standard (PALS Project and the Energy Department is working on the legislation to restrict 
the importation of non-energy efficient electrical appliances into Tuvalu.
6.1 Public Education
The energy efficiency component of the Master Plan requires practical demonstrations of energy 
efficient technologies. In a close knit community, any successful energy saving will spread by word of 
mouth. In addition, TEC will communicate key messages through government, schools, via radio and 
monthly bills. It is one of the key tasks of the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Unit to educate 
the public on energy efficient choices.
Understanding the monthly power bill
One of the first energy efficiency campaigns will be the improved understanding of the monthly 
power bill. People will be told the true cost of electricity and the level of government subsidy.
Appliance Energy Use
TEC will loan plug-in power meters to account holders so that they can monitor the energy demand of 
their appliances.
TEC will provide annual energy cost information on the appliances available in Tuvalu to demonstrate 
the annual power savings with more efficient appliances. Refrigeration appliances are the major 
users of electricity in Tuvalu and there is scope for significant energy efficiency improvement. 
Implementation of the appliance labelling programme will assist consumers to better understand 
Energy Efficiency
6.0Demonstration Fale
An important tool for the demonstration of energy efficiency will be the Show Home that TEC will 
install on its grounds by the end of 2013. This will be funded by the UNDP through its SIDS-DOCK 
fund and will become a centre of learning. People will be able to have a look at energy efficient 
construction elements and appliances on their way to paying their monthly bills.
The objectives of the Demonstration Fale are:
a) To demonstrate renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies to the public 
of Tuvalu;
b) To be used by the REEEU as an office and educational facility;
c) To be used by TEC and relevant third parties for the testing of new appliances;
d) Encourage community discussion on energy efficiency. 
This building will match the local style of house design and will feature on a small scale all 
renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies that are to be introduced to Tuvalu. This 
modern Tuvaluan fale, as proposed, is a structure containing both contemporary and traditional 
features and is intended to demonstrate the efficient use of energy in a house. 
It has the following features:
• 80 square metres enclosed floor area;
• 40 square metres open parasol structure supporting PV modules rated at 4 kWp.;
• 180km/h wind speed cyclone resistant design;
• Roof design composed of traditional thatch on modern cyclone resistant plywood;
• Air conditioned, ventilated and open rooms; and
• Raised for flood protection.
Energy Efficiency
6.0The technologies that can be demonstrated at this facility are wide ranging and could potentially 
include a small wind turbine, batteries, an inverter for grid connection or off-grid operation, low 
energy air conditioning with remote demand control, cool energy storage, refrigeration and other 
low energy devices, fans, energy monitors and controllers, insulation, glazing, water collection and 
storage, low energy lighting, biomass-based cooking, etc. 
6.2 High User Energy Audits
Power demand analysis
Preliminary analysis of the electricity requirements in terms of demand and consumption of large 
consumers in Funafuti, such as the government building, the hospital, the refrigerated shipping 
containers (“reefers”) and the desalination plant, has been carried out in Funafuti. Some of the 
demand and consumption profiles were determined from known patterns of use but others may 
need some more detailed investigation (e.g. the hotel) where patterns are irregular. Table 6.1 sets 
out recent annual consumption figures for the top 20 electricity consumers in Tuvalu. An improved 
knowledge of the power demand and consumption will influence the technical specifications and 
the resources that need to be mobilised.
Energy Audits
Audits have been completed on a number of buildings and significant energy saving opportunities 
have been identified. The REEEU at TEC will continue to carry out energy audits of the high energy 
customers. These energy audits will identify opportunities to reduce energy consumption that 
aredue to a number of different factors including out-dated technology, inadequate maintenance, 
wear and tear and inefficient processes or building-related issues such as; ventilation, insulation, 
windows, shading, etc. The REEEU will also advise on technical or operational solutions, will 
estimate potential power savings and advise on the acquisition of energy efficient equipment. 
Energy audit guidelines have been prepared and comprise:
• Energy audit process.
• Energy audit templates.
• Customer energy use self-assessment form and guidelines.
Energy Efficiency
6.0Table 6-1 Top 20 electricity consumers (kWh/annum)
6.3 Technology Improvements
Air Conditioning
Air conditioning is estimated to contribute to 30% of the energy demand of Funafuti.
The use of air conditioning of offices is part of the modern work environment. It is estimated that 
about 1000 air conditioning units are installed at offices, mainly on Funafuti, to increase productivity 
and to reduce corrosion of electronic appliances from the salt-laden air, which is particularly 
aggressive in Funafuti. Public places and private homes do not typically have air conditioning and 
people rely on shading, natural draft or fans for cooling. Influenced by the tropical ocean currents, 
air temperatures vary little between 29 and 33oC during day and night throughout the seasons. An 
indoor temperature of 28oC with a slight draft is considered comfortable.
The air conditioning plant of the government building will be evaluated early in the energy efficiency 
programme as it is the largest single energy user in Tuvalu
Energy Efficiency
6.0
Customer kWh/year
Government Building 335,280
Princess Margaret Hospital 186,840
JY Freezer 46,338
Desalination Plant 44,383
Telecom Hub 34,493
Mackenzie Reefer 33,197
TCS Freezer 31,900
Wharf 28,083
TCS Main Office 26,152
Fusi 25,875
NAFICOT 22,191
Sulani Refeer 18,799
Waste Management 18,052
Fisheries 17,407
USP Centre 16,763
Media Building 16,479
Telecom Offices 16,381
Laloniu Reefer 15,058
Pacific Energy 13,858
JY Shop 13,263The system comprises 18 individual units each with separate ducting for cool air and with installed 
electrical rating of 10 kW. Detailed investigations and improvements will be trialled on individual 
units. Improvements of the air conditioning could include:
a) Use of auxiliary fans;
b) Improved temperature controls;
c) Elimination of plant design flaws (e.g. cooling process, shading, ventilation);
d) Improvements in the building envelope (e.g. air leakage, insulation, shading, natural 
cooling);
e) Review of cooling technology (e.g. more efficient plant and equipment);
f) Energy buffering; and
g) Repairs and maintenance.
Refrigeration
Refrigeration is estimated to use about 30% of the generated energy and has two key technologies:
a) Freezers for long-term food storage, (eg. containers at the port, commercial shop freezers and 
residential freezers); and 
b) Refrigerators for short-term food storage and display.
While these technologies are similar in principle, the difference is in the operating temperatures, the 
technology used and the operation of the appliances. TEC’s REEEU will investigate typical industrial, 
commercial and residential applications and identify the best-value-for-money improvements of 
these appliances. As with air conditioning, initially the users may adjust some settings or ways of 
operation. The next step will involve a review of the technology used.
Energy Efficiency
6.0International Collaboration
The REEEU will network with regional and international organisations on renewable energy and 
energy efficiency. 
Lighting
Energy efficient compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) (energy efficient light bulbs) are widely used in 
Tuvalu. In 2011, TEC installed trial LED street lighting and is likely to install additional LED lighting in 
2012 and 2013.
Energy Buffering with Ice
A major recurring capital expenditure in the renewable energy management will be batteries. In the 
course of the 10-year programme, more batteries will be required as the use of diesel generation 
is reduced. As batteries are (still) very expensive to purchase and to recycle, alternatives will be 
investigated. One possibility is the use of ice as an energy buffer. 
This principle is adopted in the air conditioning of government and commercial buildings in 
other parts of the world where, for example, the overnight electricity tariff is much lower than 
the daytime tariff. In such installations, ice is generated in purpose designed tanks overnight and 
“burnt” during the day when cooling is required. While this tariff situation does not exist in Tuvalu, 
any surplus PV generation could be used by chillers to produce ice for storage until required. The 
central air conditioning units of the Government building are 10 years old and require continuous 
maintenance. When replacement is considered necessary, an ice tank system could be evaluated as 
an option.
 Government Building in Funafuti
6.4 Demand Side Management
Procurement and instalment of pre-payment smart meters to all electricity users is a priority. TEC 
currently has slightly over 2000 customers connected and, as well as improving the efficiency of 
revenue collection, the meters will enable implementation of a differentiated tariff that varies the 
tariff to match the generation and demand profile, making it possible to shift the demand profile 
Energy Efficiency
6.07.1 Diesel 
The cost of diesel fuel used by TEC for electricity generation was recorded from 2006 to 2010. The 
figures for 2004 and 2005 were provided by Kansai Electricity in the feasibility study for the E8-
funded 40 kWp PV solar system in Funafuti. Up to 2010, the Japanese government subsidised the 
cost of the diesel fuel but in 2011, this policy was changed and diesel fuel was donated to directly 
to TEC. Therefore, the 2011 figure was extrapolated from data by the Australian Petroleum Institute 
for the Australian wholesale market with an addition of about A$0.30 for the additional transport 
cost between these countries. The trend line has an increase of 10.7% annually, which is the 
nominal average annual diesel price increase in Tuvalu over the past seven years (Figure 7.1 refers). 
To provide a comparison, Figure 7.2 shows the long-term trends in US$ for Brent crude. 
Figure 7-1 Diesel price trend
Figure 7-2 Historic Brent crude oil price
Energy Economics in Tuvalu
7.0On this basis, it was assumed that the inflation-adjusted, average oil price increase of 5% per annum 
would be conservative and is used in the economic modelling of the renewable electricity value in 
Tuvalu, starting with a baseline of A$1.50 per litre in 2010.
7.2 Solar Generation
Tuvalu is a tiny market in a remote location with little resources. These conditions impact on the 
cost of equipment supply in Tuvalu, including PV systems. It was therefore considered prudent to 
use TEC’s own experience with the 46 kWp Vaitupu system for the initial estimation of costs. The 
total installed cost of the Vaitupu system was calculated at A$14,500/kWp in 2011; costs included 
batteries, a support frame, design and project management.
There are a number of factors that will affect the installed costs of future PV systems in comparison 
with the above benchmark. Some of these are expected to reduce future costs such as a continuing 
trend downwards in the cost of PV modules and the larger project scale. On the other hand, factors 
likely in increase the cost include costs associated with maintaining grid stability and building 
upgrade work associated with the 1000 roof programme.
In light of all the above, an average installed cost of PV in Tuvalu of A$12,500/kWp in 2011 costs 
has been used in the economic analysis. A breakdown is provided in Appendix A. Future project 
experience will provide better data and will be considered as part of a continuous review of this 
Master Plan.
 Battery Bank in Vaitupu
7.3 Wind Generation
Based on information from wind turbine suppliers, it is estimated that the installed cost of units 
likely to be most suitable for application in Tuvalu will range from A$4,000/kWp to $10,500/kWp for 
275 kW to 6 kWp respectively including design, project management and connection to the grid. 
Turbines within this range suitable for application in the Pacific Island environment are available, 
including provision to enable lowering in the event of an incoming cyclone. Table 7.1 shows 
Energy Economics in Tuvalu
7.0Table 7-1 Wind turbine indicative costs
A combination of wind and PV generation will provide benefits in reducing battery storage or 
reduced diesel generation. In the case of Funafuti, based on wind patterns, solar radiation data and 
the daily power profile, a preliminary evaluation indicates that the optimum energy mix will be 2/3 
PV solar and 1/3 wind energy. This optimum would reduce required battery storage by up to 30% 
and minimise standby biofuel generation. Furthermore, this will also assist in resolving the issue of 
limited space for PV arrays in Funafuti. 
Further investigation is required to confirm the feasibility of wind generation but given the potential 
benefits in terms of cost of generation, it is considered that this will be a worthwhile investment. 
The investigation will confirm the earlier wind data collected and will examine the technical and 
environmental issues that require resolution if a turbine of 275 kWp is to be installed, noting 
that this would bring significant cost advantages. In view of the uncertainties that will have to be 
resolved before the wind option is finalised, all cost analysis assumes that PV only will be used. 
7.4 Bio-Diesel
Introduction of bio-diesel is the last stage of the master plan and has not been included in the 
economic analysis. When 85 to 95% of energy demand is generated from renewable energy sources 
it is calculated that the required bio-diesel volume will be in the order of 100,000 litres. The small 
volume is likely to be uneconomic to produce on Tuvalu and it is assumed that bio-diesel will be 
imported. The cost difference between bio-diesel and diesel has minimal impact on the economic 
analysis.
7.5 Energy Efficiency
Energy efficiency is an important component of the Master Plan. International experience has 
shown that in terms of cost benefit, expenditure on energy efficiency measures provides superior 
return on investment than providing the generation capacity that would otherwise be necessary. An 
ambitious target for improvement in energy efficiency has been set at a 30% reduction in terms of 
electricity consumption per notional GDP and on this basis, the modelling of the future renewable 
energy requirement is based on the assumption that the economy would grow by about 2.5% per 
year (net). A 30% reduction of energy demand per GDP on Funafuti will be equivalent to a 25% 
reduction of energy demand per national GDP up to 2020 and on this basis, the overall electricity 
Energy Economics in Tuvalu
7.0
PEAK OUTPUT KW 6 50 275
Turbine including tilting mast $50,000 $230,000 $640,000
Installation including transport, foundations, erection, 
commissioning and training
$8,000 $130,000 $250,000
Spares $5,500 $15,000 $42,000
TOTAL $63,500 $375,000 $932,000
Cost per kW installed $10,583 $7,500 $3,389Energy efficiency improvements will be initially targeted on Funafuti. Funafuti has a higher power 
demand per capita than the Outer Islands and also consumes 85% of the electricity generated. 
However, as TEC staff gain experience in energy efficiency implementation, the Outer Islands will be 
incorporated into the energy efficiency programme. 
In the financial model, capital for the purchase of energy efficient equipment was not included 
on the grounds that overall the economic benefits will outweigh the initial costs. Early in the 
implementation of this Master Plan, options to encourage replacement of energy-inefficient 
equipment with energy efficient equipment will be considered and incorporated into the energy 
efficiency programme. 
7.6 Economic Analysis
Currently Tuvalu imports 1.76 million litres per year of diesel fuel at a cost of A$1.50/litre. 
Conversion to renewable energy will reduce the diesel demand. The objective of this Master Plan 
is that by 2020, diesel generation will be reduced to between 5% and 15% of current generation. 
The cost of solar arrays and batteries to replace the current energy demand is estimated to be A$52 
million. Savings in diesel fuel over the life of the project are estimated to be A$150 million. 
Even after implementation of the renewable electricity programme and including energy efficiency 
improvements, some diesel generation will be required to provide stand-by generation when 
prolonged weather conditions limit renewable electricity production. On the basis of the existing 
diesel generators being maintained for stand-by use until converted to bio-diesel operation, the cost 
benefit of the renewable electricity programme is mainly determined by the following three factors:
a) The project life;
b) The marginal cost of power generation from diesel during the project life; and
c) The cost of the renewable energy equipment and maintenance spread over the project life.
Cash Flow Analysis
Cash flow analysis is a common and simplified method of establishing the cost benefit of an 
investment by taking into account the initial capital investment, other costs incurred during the 
life of the project (such as operating and maintenance costs) and the identified cost savings that 
result as a consequence of the project. The following cash flow analysis is based on the following 
assumptions:
a) The solar arrays have a 30-year life. PV modules are typically guaranteed for 25 years. 
However, the technical life can be expected to be slightly higher, e.g. 30 years;
b) Energy consumption remains at 2012 levels for the first eight years through the energy 
efficiency programme, following this period energy use increases at 2% matching GDP;
c) 5% per year ongoing, real price increase of diesel;
d) All costs are based on 2011 values;
e) Battery capacity will provide two days’ energy consumption on Funafuti and three days’ 
7.0
Energy Economics in Tuvaluf) Batteries are replaced every 5 to 10 years, it is expected that good quality inverters will last 
15 years.
g) Operations & maintenance cost are conservatively assessed as 2% of the new (2011) asset 
value;
h) Disposal cost not included in calculation (due to timing);
i) Renewable energy investment paid by donors during first 10 years; and
j) TEC pay all operations and maintenance costs plus replacement cost (mainly batteries).
The annual cash flow is expected to be as shown in Figure 7-3:
Figure 7-3 RE and Diesel Annual Cash Flow
The above figure compares annual expenditure on generation assuming implementation of the 
renewable electricity programme, with that of continuing to generate using diesel generation as at 
present. The renewable electricity expenditure includes operations & maintenance, diesel/bio-diesel 
costs and future equipment replacements (eg. batteries and inverters). It is estimated that the 
renewable electricity generation costs will remain at a similar level to the current diesel costs and 
much lower than the predicted diesel costs, with the gap increasing with time as diesel fuel prices 
increase.
The figure also shows the required donor investment of A$6.5 million per year for the next eight 
years that will allow the renewable energy programme to be completed by 2020. This is based on 
the programme commencing in 2012.
Energy Economics in Tuvalu
7.0The following graph shows the accumulated cash flows. 
Figure 7-4 Renewable Energy and Diesel Accumulated Cash Flows
Key points to note are:
a) Diesel expenditure, business as usual (BAU) accumulating to A$176 million in 30 years;
b) Total renewable electricity expenditure including replacement capital and operating costs 
accumulating to A$115 million; and
c) If all renewable energy expenditure were compared with diesel savings, the payback would 
be 20 years.
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis
Project economics are often analysed with the help of models calculating net present values (NPV) 
or internal rates of return (IRR). Net present values discount future costs and income streams with 
certain discount rates based on risk and weighted average costs of capital. 
A discounted cash flow analysis was completed using the simplification that the full conversion to 
renewable energy occurs in the first year to show a clear comparison between renewable energy 
and the existing diesel generation. The analysis considered the installation and battery replacement 
costs, cost of diesel fuel and additional operations and maintenance costs for the renewable 
energy plant. All other costs (eg. cost of maintenance and replacement of diesel generators) were 
considered to be the same in both the business as usual and renewable electricity options and were 
not specifically included in the analysis.
Based on the above, and a 5% discount rate and 3% inflation, the net present value was found to be 
A$20 million with a payback period of 18 years and an internal rate of return of 7%. While showing 
a net benefit, this analysis indicates that the rate of return is less than that would normally be 
Energy Economics in Tuvalu
7.0A sensitivity analysis on the key parameters found the following results.
Energy Economics in Tuvalu
7.0
Cost of 
installation
Average annual 
increase in 
diesel
Discount Rate Net Present Value Payback 
Period
Internal 
Rate of 
Return
A$52 Million 5% 5% A$20 Million 18 7.0%
A$62 Million 5% 5% A$2 Million 22 5.2%
A$52 Million 2% 5% (A$ -22 Million) 27 1.7%
A$52 Million 8% 5% A$93 Million 15 11.2%
A$52 Million 5% 8% (A$-7 Million) 18 7.0%8.1 Funding
Funding this programme as one package rather than as a series of individual projects will provide 
Tuvalu with a steady funding stream and a long-term commitment by donors for the implementation 
of the investment plan. The funding can be arranged as co-funding amongst a group of nations. The 
estimated finance is A$6.5 million per year from 2013 to 2020. A technical assistance package will 
be required to assist TEC with implementation while ongoing maintenance and replacement capital 
(mainly batteries and electronic controls) will be funded by TEC from revenue.
The infrastructure is designed for 30 years and will need to be replaced in stages after 2040. By that 
time, fossil fuels are assumed to be four times as expensive as in 2010 and renewable energy will be 
the only affordable alternative for Tuvalu. 
8.2 Capacity Building
As the government enterprise responsible for generating and distributing electricity, TEC is at the 
centre of the renewable electricity and energy efficiency programme. Therefore, the capacity 
building of TEC staff is critical to programme success. In the past, worthwhile projects have often not 
been successful because of the lack of capacity building that included practical elements, including 
for example, equipment trial periods that provided operating and maintenance staff with “handson” experience in day to day operations and trouble-shooting. Technologies and equipment will 
need to be carefully selected to enable construction, operation and maintenance by Tuvaluans given 
the relative remoteness of Tuvalu and the time and cost involved in procuring overseas maintenance 
personnel. However, as a consequence of this remoteness, Tuvaluans have developed a good level 
of practical skills and, with appropriate training, TEC will be capable of carrying out most of the 
maintenance required.
While external specialist technical assistance will be required, maximising the involvement of 
TEC in the programme from procurement to commissioning will not only provide employment 
opportunities for local people, but will also reduce costs compared with employing expatriate staff 
by an estimated 20%. 
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation
The proposed construction programme, with an annual budget of approximately A$6.5 million, 
will have a large impact on TEC’s business. In order for TEC to manage the capital investment 
programme, TEC will need to develop further capacity in the following areas:
a) System evaluation and design;
b) Project management;
c) International procurement;
d) Project administration;
e) Construction management;
f) Electronic controls; and
g) Marketing (for community support)
Implementation Strategy
8.0The REEEU is part of TEC, and the expatriate REEE Manager reports to the General Manager of TEC. 
A full-time, local supervisor is allocated to the REEEU and has received training for the ongoing 
management of the programme. During the roll-out of the programme, the unit will need to 
increase their staff to five to 10 people for project management, administration, and promotion 
within the community.
As outlined in the previous section, the capacity building programme will include TEC staff and 
other stakeholders receiving practical training in the installation and operation of renewable energy 
equipment. This will provide TEC and the people of Tuvalu with the confidence to select suitable 
and sustainable technologies in the future.
It is anticipated that the design and construction of the various projects will initially be executed by 
suppliers or external contractors. The main tasks for the REEE Manager and Supervisor will include 
liaison with stakeholders, suppliers, contractors and donors. As sufficient experience is gained, TEC 
will increase the level of involvement of TEC staff and thereby reduce the costs. 
The integration of the renewable electricity generators will also involve the TEC Generation and 
Distribution Managers and their staff. Some of the TEC staff may require overseas training.
Eventually, in the course of the 10-year development programme, TEC’s focus will shift from dieselpowered electricity generation to renewable energy, and staff resources will adjust to the new focus.
TEC’s future Business Plans will incorporate relevant aspects of this Master Plan.
8.3 Policy and Regulations
In order to facilitate a smooth implementation, whole-of-government support is required for the 
setting of policy, legislation, rules and regulations. The following is a list of possible examples only 
and thus not complete; these rules and regulations will be introduced over time and in accordance 
with priorities:
Land and Ownership
• The Government will legislate as necessary to obtain community co-operation with TEC on 
the installation and maintenance of energy equipment such as solar modules, inverters and 
power meters.
• New businesses or developments will be required to install solar modules on their roofs 
(e.g. the planned airport terminal).
• TEC will own and operate all grid-connected power generation systems including the roof 
mounted arrays.
• TEC will obtain a written agreement by the property owners before renewable energy 
generation equipment is installed. This agreement will include the financial arrangements 
for any intended roof modifications and provide for access to install and maintain the 
equipment.
8.0
Implementation Strategy8.0
Implementation Strategy
• Public or private property owners will take all due care to ensure power generation 
equipment is not damaged and will perform satisfactorily. Property owners will follow TEC’s 
advice on matters like tree cutting and provide TEC with the required access for such 
maintenance.
• Private people have the right to own and operate power generation equipment that is not 
connected to the grid and that is safely installed and operated. The safety and performance 
of such equipment is the responsibility of the owner.
Commercial Relationships
• TEC’s industry structure, e.g. TEC working as a corporate body with international accounting 
practices.
• TEC will inform the public on efficient and safe energy utilisation.
• TEC is allowed to trade in the supply of electrical appliances and equipment for the purpose 
of promoting the safe and efficient use of electricity. This is not a monopoly for TEC and 
private sector companies are also permitted to participate in this market.
• Electricity tariffs will be reviewed on a regular basis to support the development of a 
renewable electricity based infrastructure and assist with energy efficiency.
• TEC may subsidise the procurement and installation of energy efficient equipment or private 
installation of renewable energy equipment, where this is economic for TEC as a stateowned electricity supplier. This will be decided on a case-by-case basis, using criteria agreed 
between TEC and the Government of Tuvalu. 
Technical Standards
• TEC will identify technical standards relevant to Tuvalu’s Renewable Electricity & Energy 
Efficient Master Plan and will make these standards available for public viewing.
• The Government of Tuvalu will appoint authority to appropriate organisations to ensure the 
proper implementation of technical standards, such as the cyclone proofing of buildings and 
roofs.
Environmental
• TEC will inform and consult with the community on environmental impacts of the renewable 
energy. In cases of dispute, the Government of Tuvalu will mediate. 
• The Government will prepare special regulations covering certain principles, such as roofmounting of solar panels instead of ground-mounting.
• The implementation of this Master Plan has a high priority and it will be important to ensure 
that community groups and other stakeholders participate in environmental debates in a 
timely manner.
Social
• The Government of Tuvalu and TEC have an obligation to implement the Master Plan in
the most economical way. Both parties will consider local employment, where this is 
feasible, to stimulate the local economy. • The electricity system design will consider demand side management at times of energy 
shortages. In such cases, social needs of the community will be considered and priorities 
set. In the case of dispute, the Government of Tuvalu will make the ultimate decision.
Cultural
• TEC will take into account the cultural heritage of Tuvalu. For example, traditional house 
designs will be supported where feasible.
• Cultural heritage will also be considered in the utilisation of energy such as in the use of 
land, design of house and food preparation.
• In its promotions for Energy Efficiency and for “Enetise Tutumau” (steadfast electricity), TEC 
and the Government of Tuvalu will use the Tuvaluan language, where possible.
Implementation Strategy
8.0References
The following documents were referred to in the preparation of the Master Plan:
E8 (2009) The Tuvalu Solar Project. E8 General Secretariat, Montreal, Canada.
Ecology Management ApS (2010) Tuvalu Wind Power Development: Wind Study and Feasibility 
Report. Report prepared for the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environment Programme (“SPREP”) 
Apia, Samoa.
Empower Consultants (2008) Tuvalu Electricity Corporation: Loss Reduction Programme. Stage 1 
Report. For the Ministry of Economic Development. Empower Consultants Ltd, Wellington.
Empower Consultants (2009) Tuvalu Electricity Corporation: Loss Reduction Programme. Stage 2 
Report. For the Ministry of Economic Development. Empower Consultants Ltd, Wellington.
GL Garrad Hassan (2012) Funafuti Wind Energy. Report for the MFAT Pacific Energy Programme. 
Garrad Hassan Pacific Pty Ltd, Wellington
Government of Tuvalu (2005) Te Kageega II: National Strategies for Sustainable Development 2005-
2015. Economic Research and Policy Division, Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Industry, 
Funafuti.
Government of Tuvalu (2009) The Kakeega II Matrix: Year Four. Economic Research and Policy 
Division, Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Industry, Funafuti.
IT Power (2013) Grid Connected Solar PV: Tuvalu. Report for the MFAT Pacific Energy Programme. IT 
Power (Australia) Pty Ltd. Turner ACT. 
IT Power (2013) Nanumanga Mini Grid PV: Tuvalu. Report for the MFAT Pacific Energy Programme. IT 
Power (Australia) Pty Ltd. Turner ACT. 
IT Power (2013) Nanumea Mini Grid PV: Tuvalu. Report for the MFAT Pacific Energy Programme. IT 
Power (Australia) Pty Ltd. Turner ACT. References
IT Power (2013) Niutao Mini Grid PV: Tuvalu. Report for the MFAT Pacific Energy Programme. IT Power 
(Australia) Pty Ltd. Turner ACT. 
KEMA (2013) Funafuti Atoll, Tuvalu Distributed Renewable Generation Study: Integrating PV Solar and 
Wind generation with the TEC electric system. Report for the MFAT Pacific Energy Programme. DNV 
KEMA.
Opus (2013) Economic Assessment of Renewable Energy Generation for Tuvalu. Report for the MFAT 
Pacific Energy Programme. Opus International Consultants Ltd. Wellington.
Ridgway (2008) Study into the Establishment of a Renewable Energy & Energy Efficiency Unit at the 
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation: Final Report for SPREP – Pacific Regional Environment Programme. 
Ridgway Capital Projects Limited. Christchurch.Appendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy ConceptsAppendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy Concepts
System Concepts – Outer Islands
The renewable electricity generation and distribution systems proposed are as follows:
a) For seven Outer Islands: small island grids working on 230/400 VAC with peak demands 
between 30 and 100 kW, with renewable electricity provided by PV with batteries and a 
diesel generator. Wind generation may be added at a later stage. A standard minigrid design based on a model design developed for MFAT will be considered for adoption. 
It is anticipated that the management and control of the systems will be similar to that 
proven in service in Vaitupu.
b) For Niulakita: home-based PV and battery systems on low voltage DC.
Funafuti – Decentralised Solar Roof Concept
Funafuti has a population of in excess of 5000 with about 900 dwellings and about 250 government 
and commercial buildings. Fogafale is the main island of the Funafuti atoll on which nearly 100% of 
the population live. Fogafale is densely populated with little spare land.
Long stretches of the island are very narrow with just sufficient space for a house and the road. In 
the east is the deep ocean, on the west the shallow lagoon. In the central part of the island, a large 
area is occupied by the airport runwayAppendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy Concepts
With Funafuti having reached a very high population density, land has become a scarce resource. 
Unoccupied land has to be regarded as a reserve for future buildings or high quality land use. 
For this reason, ground-mounted solar arrays are considered environmentally and politically 
unacceptable and why TEC has been promoting a 1000 Solar Roof concept. 
The Tuvalu “Solar Roofs” concept will have the following features:
a) Solar roofs will be clear of shading;
b) Solar roofs will be designed for technical lives of more than 30 years;
c) Solar roofs will be cyclone-proof, water-tight, rainwater-collecting, non-corrosive and low 
maintenance;
d) Solar modules will to be removable for quick maintenance;
e) Electrical connections will to be accessible, durable and safe;
f) Solar roofs will need to have spare space for access and geometric / structural reasons 
(estimated 20%);
g) The modules will need to have clearance for natural ventilation to avoid overheating and;
h) The roofs have ideally a pitch between five and 10 degrees and face northwards. However 
roofs that are not shadedbut are of low pitch or orientated other than to northwill be Appendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy Concepts
Key Issues
A key assumption is that as critical infrastructure the electricity generation and network should 
survive or be repairable within a reasonable time following a major cyclone, including resistance 
to wind pressures and flying debris and storm surge. With this in mind, a detailed survey has been 
undertaken of the building stock in Funafuti taking into account the following factors:
Mounting of Photovoltaic panels:
• Competition for use of ground space, shading factors and vulnerability make widespread use 
of ground-mounted panels impractical, particularly on Funafuti.
• Potential of mounting on the roofs of substantial buildings is good but roof strengthening 
and repair will need to be considered and engineered.
• The replacement of very light parasol additions to domestic houses would initially be the 
best domestic solution as the durability of the base structure can be engineered, made 
standard and maintained. A prototype should be engineered and built to advance this 
concept.
• Domestic roofs are varied and support structures often in poor condition. Even new housing 
will require proof of structural engineering to support the panels.
• The economics of building have led people into higher maintenance and shorter life 
solutions which limits the durability of domestic rooftop solutions.
• The unratified Tuvaluan standard set the design wind speed as 45 m/s and has no 
recommendation with respect to storm surge. In our view, the design wind speed for 
infrastructure should be set against a maximum likely event based on current trends within 
the next 50 years. Cyclone Bebe would seem to represent this. In order to make a decision, 
the data on either the recorded 1 minute wind speed or the best official estimate needs 
to be obtained, as well as storm surge pattern and effects. Analysis should then be made of 
other possible directional scenarios using an accepted methodology.Appendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy Concepts
Building Surveys
A general survey was taken of buildings and houses throughout Fogafale and a report provided to 
TEC. Special attention was given to the PWD Standard for Houses and Public Buildings such as the 
Princess Margaret Hospital. A meeting was also held with the Deputy Director of Health with respect 
to the hospital. Measurements were taken and the structure noted. At various times informal 
meetings took place with relevant individuals.
The report sets out the results of the survey including the condition of the buildings and the ability 
of the building structures to support the solar arrays and withstand cyclone conditions. Details of 
the strengthening work recommended are included in the report. 
Batteries
Batteries will be required for grid stability reasons and for daily energy buffering. Initially, the diesel 
generators will fulfil this role, but as the level of renewable electricity generation injection increases, 
batteries will be required. Preliminary grid stability modelling has indicated that batteries will be 
required once the installed capacity of the renewable generation reached about 400 kWp. This is 
expected to occur in 2014.
In the Outer Islands, the operational battery capacity will be based on three days of average daily 
energy consumption to provide an acceptable level of supply security. 
For Funafuti, the initial battery capacity will be provided to ensure grid stability only and renewable 
electricity shortages owing to weather conditions will be compensated with diesel-generated power. 
By 2020, it is proposed that that Funafuti will have two days of battery capacity in order to provide 
additional capability to cope with adverse weather conditions and minimise diesel/biodiesel 
generation. Some care will be required in the selection and arrangement of inverter equipment to 
ensure that compatibility with a future grid management system – particularly as the level of battery 
storage increases.
Required Renewable Energy Capacity
Table A-1 over sets out estimates of the renewable electricity capacities required. 
Relevant factors taken into account were:
a) The net average capacity factor of 15.0% was derived from the Vaitupu plant (17.2%) and 
the Funafuti plant (16.2%) and then allowed for reduced PV array output with time. It 
is noted that the Vaitupu plant has performed better, particularly considering that this 
included battery losses, which the Funafuti plant does not have because it is grid-tie system.
b) The generation target on Funafuti is based on 95% of the current value, assuming that 
consumption will not increase due to energy efficiency balancing new load expected from 
GDP growth. The generation target for the Outer Islands is assumed to be 130% of current 
demand due to economic development that is partly a result ofthe increased availability of 
electricity. For the purposes of the estimates, no allowance is made for improved energy 
efficiency although this is expected to show some results with two or three years.
) Nt bttld tb7%Appendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy Concepts
Cost Estimates
Table A-2 over shows the basis for the figure of $A12,500 per kWp used in the cost analysis cost. 
Table A-1 Estimates of required renewable electricity capacity
Notes:
(1) RE = renewable electricity generation (PV and/or wind)
(2) Energy efficiency improvements assumed for Funafuti but not for Outer Islands.
(3) Data includes some estimates.
Atoll/Island - Population
- Customers
- Av h/h size 
Annual consumption 
per capita(kWh)
Peak demand
kW
Estimated kWp for 
maximum RE1
Funafuti - 5,277
- 870
- 6
956 1,000 4,900
Nanumea - 773
- 147
- 5.3
143 37 74
Nanumaga3 - 685
- 142
- 4.8
168 37 77
Niutao3 - 772
- 175
- 4.4
142 39 74
Nui3 - 638
- 138
- 4.6
188 31 81
Vaitupu - 1,851
- 288
- 6.4
159 95 197
Nukufetau3 - 682
- 147
- 4.6
176 38 81
Nukulaelae3 - 457
- 90
- 5.1
153 20 47
Niulakita - 41 
TOTALS 11,126 1,297 3,986Appendix A
Appendix A
Solar Energy Concepts
Table A-2 Basis for cost estimate for renewable electricity generation plant
Funafuti Daily Energy Analysis
To quantify the optimum renewable energy generation mix and battery capacity, a “typical” week 
was modelled with regard to solar, wind and diesel power generation, demand, and the state of 
charge of the battery.
The modelling resulted in an economic optimum at a mix of 1/3 nominal wind power capacity and 
2/3 PV solar capacity, with two-day-demand battery capacity and a generator cut-in point at 50% of 
battery charge. This is a design issue that will need to be modelled in more detail. For the purpose 
of this plan, it is important to consider that wind power can reduce the overall battery capacity and 
the amount of bio-diesel being used. For example, with the inclusion of wind power, bio-diesel 
could be as low as 5% of annual energy generation; without wind power, bio-diesel would need to 
be 15%. The demand for bio-diesel would also increase with reduced battery capacity.
PV solar 
Costing
2009 
costs
economise
based d
on 
at 2011 
value
at 2011 
value Tuvalu Vaitupu 
Experience
40 
kWp
300 
kWp oneoff AUD/kW
p
AUD/kW
Design and Project p
Management
1,32
7
1,00
0 Support Frame / Solar 
Roof
99
7
1,50
PV Array and electrical 0
supplies
3,92
1
2,50
0 Inverter
s
1,04
2
1,04
Cabling and 2
Switches
44
2
44
2 0
Batteries, 
3d
3,37
8
2,69
Battery 3
Controllers
63
0
63
0 0
Spare 
parts
38
8
38
8 0
Freigh
t
75
6
75
6 0
Installation and 
Commissioning
1,68
2
1,50
0
Tota
l
14,56
2
12,45
0Appendix A
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
Grid Stability
An important part of the programme implementation will be the integration of the renewable 
generation plant into the Funafuti network in a way that maintains grid stability. Renewable 
energy generation is subject to relatively rapid changes in generation conditions including passing 
clouds and changes in wind velocity. As the percentage of renewable energy generation increases, 
measures will be necessary to maintain a stable grid in terms of frequency and voltage, the most 
common method being the installation of batteries. Preliminary modelling indicates that on 
Funafuti it should be possible to develop 400kWp distributed renewable energy generation before 
batteries will be required. In the case of the Outer Islands, the solar-battery-diesel hybrid systems 
proposed are inherently stable if properly designed. 
Grid stability has been modelled using Electromagnetic Transients Programme (EMTP) analysis 
for the integration of renewable energy generation into the existing Funafuti grid, as described in 
section 6.8. The grid, comprising 11kV & 415V feeders and 11kV/415V transformers, are modelled 
together with the three 600kW synchronous generators at the Fogafale power station. The model 
predicts the dynamic response of the generating plant to fluctuations in load and de-centralised 
renewable generation. Both peak-load and low-load conditions are separately modelled as 
consolidated 415V loads on each of the 14 feeders, based on the energy usage data provided.
The PV generation was modelled for each year between 2011 (all installed PV generation to date) 
and 2020, according to the proposed implementation programme set out in section 6.1. Diode 
bridge rectifier and PWM inverter components were included at the end of each LV feeder. Two 
disturbance scenarios were considered: a fault on one of the feeders with automatic disconnection 
of the transformer by the protection system; and a large cloud moving west to east (or vice versa) 
at 20km/hr (worst non-fault scenario), which will reduce PV output from 100% to 25% as the cloud 
moves over that section of the island. The 2km maximum geographic distribution of generation in 
the west-east direction, will translate to a 75% reduction in total PV generation within six minutes.
An important consideration in the stability study is the geographical distribution of the PV 
installations. If all connected onto one feeder, the cloud scenario described above will cause an 
instantaneous reduction in PV generation, whereas a wider geographic distribution of PV generation 
will cause a staged reduction in total PV generation over the six-minute interval, allowing the diesel 
generators to respond to the change in load on the grid without losing grid stability.
The transformer LV terminal voltage and grid frequency were monitored during the simulations. 
These are required to be maintained within -20% to +15% (voltage) and +2% and -5% (frequency) 
and were used as the criteria for acceptable grid performance.
The simulation results for the initial PV implementation stages, with no storage batteries installed, 
indicate that up to 400kWp of PV generation can be grid connected while maintaining grid stability 
during short-term disturbances if the PV generation is geographically distributed. However, if the PV 
generation is all located in one geographical location, the maximum that can be connected to the 
grid will be 200kWp. 
When the above renewable electricity penetration limits are exceeded, storage batteries will be 
needed to ensure grid stability. It is proposed that this be initially achieved with an initial a battery 
installation at the power station followed by battery installations at each 11kV/415V transformer as 
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
The sizing of the batteries will be determined by the required back-up capacity rather than the 
transient stability requirements, which only requires power over a short duration (tens of seconds). 
The location of the installed batteries will be determined during detailed design in accordance 
with the location and capacity of the planned PV installations. It is proposed that the frequency 
reference for the grid be transferred from the diesel generator to the main battery inverter at the 
power station when installed. The generators will then synchronise to the inverter reference when 
required. This is most suitable for the final system, with only 5% bio-diesel generation and possibly 
no biodiesel generation at times. Control measures, including load dispatching, are therefore 
required to ensure the main batteries do not discharge beyond a minimum level required for a 
black-start.
 Battery Controls in Vaitupu (SMA)
Funafuti – Network Concept
The main features of the Funafuti network are as follows:
a) Peak demand 1,000 kW.
b) A central 11 kV medium voltage (MV) system forming the backbone of the Fogafale grid.
c) 3 x 600 kW central diesel generators feeding into the 11 kV grid, one or two on standby 
depending on demand (900 kW day, 500 kW night).
d) 14 step-down transformers associated with 14 independent low voltage (LV) 230/400 VAC 
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
The implementation of the proposed renewable electricity system will be as follows: 
a) As a matter of principle, decentralised, roof mounted PV arrays, with inverters being 
coupled with the 230V AC systems, will be installed on government / industrial / commercial 
roofs first, followed by residential roofs. 
b) In Phase 1, grid-connected solar arrays can be added without causing grid instability 
up to a total output capacity of about 400 kWp (assuming the PV generation is evenly 
spread geographically). As each new section of renewable generation is commissioned, 
grid stability will need to be monitored. If a large percentage of the renewable generation is 
to be concentrated in one area, batteries may be required to buffer fluctuations.
c) As the level of renewable generation approaches the point where instability is likely, 
batteries will need to be installed both centrally (initially) and de-centrally to buffer 
fluctuations in renewable generation.
d) Ultimately, it is proposed that each LV network will have a battery bank adjacent to the 
transformer being charged by the associated PV arrays connected to that network and, 
when required, from other sources via the central 11 kV network. The battery
switching will be controlled by control boxes (shown as CB on the schematic that follows) 
to either be charged by the 230 VAC system with PV electricity (daytime) or to discharge to 
the LV grids via a suitable inverter system. On most sunny days, the batteries will be 
charged from the decentralised PV systems during the daytime and “topped up” by the 
diesel generator at night.
e) There will be a central large battery bank next to the generator for balancing the different 
states of charge of the local batteries and buffering large short-term fluctuations in PV 
generation (e.g. fast-moving cloud covers the island or feeder fault). This battery bank 
and its large inverter will lead the system with regards to frequency stability, through the 
11 kV backbone. The revised generator control systems will therefore synchronise to the 
inverter’s frequency reference.
f) It is possible that wind generation will be included as implementation proceeds. Size and 
location are still to be determined. Community consultation in respect to location will be 
necessary. For a total rated output of 1000 kWp, a possible concept is for two wind farms 
rated 500 kWp each, one located at the southern end of Fogafale, the other on the northern 
end. The wind farms could comprise a number of turbines, probably sized between 20 
and 50 kWp with nacelle heights in the order of 25 metres. The ultimate size selection will 
be determined taking into account maintainability factors. One option to be considered 
is for wind turbines to be installed on adjacent islets or on the reefs between the islets, 
however, economic, environmental and cultural issues would need to be considered.
g) The wind turbine generators will be “stringed up” on DC or AC and feed into a battery 
bank. The batteries will buffer electricity fluctuations caused by gusts or faults and are 
needed to facilitate grid stability. The batteries will be connected via inverters directly to 
the 11 kV grid via a transformer.
h) As discussed previously in this Master Plan, to provide additional wind data and TEC with 
operating and maintenance experience, it is recommended that a single 20kWp turbine be 
installed on Funafuti in 2013, perhaps near the power station.
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
Figure B-1 Stage 1, Existing Funafuti System with 40 kWp grid connected PV array
The distribution network consists of an 11 kV three phase ring main with single branches south 
and north respectively in accordance with the geography of the island. Off this 11 kV system, 14 
transformers convert to LV at 230 / 400 VAC. The ratings of these transformers are shown in Table 
B1 over.
Figures B-3 and B-4 over are (respectively) schematics of (a) decentralised, synchronised PV clusters 
on Funafuti, PV only (Stage 2) and (b) decentralised, synchronised PV clusters on Funafuti, PV plus 
grid-connected wind generation.
Table B-1 Fogafale network transformers
Appendix B
Grid Issues
No. Location/Name Rating in kVA Peak Loads in kVA
1A Kavatoetoe 100 18
1 Philatelic 160 Not available
TES Essential Services 200 32
Gov Government 500 207
2 Faimalaga 150 95
3 Lota 200 113
4 Semu 200 130
5 TCS 63 37
6 Fisheries 400 106
7 Laisini 100 14
8 Matalagi 100 9.5
8A Fetuvalu 160 Not available
8B Te Ausaga Tapaka 100 Not availableAppendix A
Communication Systems
With a number of de-centralised generation systems dispersed throughout Funafuti and on the 
other eight Outer Islands, an internet based system that will enable TEC to monitor the performance 
of the main components of all the systems is essential. 
The systems will be developed over time as part of the renewable electricity programme 
implementation, starting with trials on Funafuti and then moving to the Outer Islands. TEC is 
working with TTC to establish an adequate level of connectivity between the Outer Islands and TEC 
in Funafuti.
Figure B-2 Communication system schematic
 Source: SMA
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
Figure B-3 Stage 2, Decentralised, synchronised PV Clusters on Funafuti, PV solar only
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
Figure B-4 Stage 3, Decentralised, synchronised PV Clusters on Funafuti, PV solar 
and grid-connected Wind power.
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
Existing Distribution Losses
A 2011 report by KEMA International B.V. established that distribution losses in Tuvalu are less 
significant than earlier reported and are similar to those in other similar countries. The reasons for 
this (better than the initially assumed performance) are:
a) A large part of the “losses” were caused by unmetered street lighting.
b) The distribution systems are relatively young with most network assets dating back 10 years, 
when systems were upgraded with new central generators and network components thanks 
to Tuvalu’s inflow of capital through the tv-campaign.
KEMA estimated losses as follows:
KEMA also made the following observations in regard to technical losses:
a) TEC has only 15 distribution transformers, but these represent a total installed capacity 
of 3030 kVA (an average of over 200kVA per transformer). The results show that distribution 
transformer losses accounted for 38.08% of the annual technical losses, with 30.05% as noload (core) loss and 8.03% as copper loss.
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
b) Using 15 distribution transformers to serve 1018 customers yields an average of 72 
customers per distribution transformer. This is a large number of customers per transformer 
and results in relatively high secondary wire losses, which include losses through the 
main cable (the secondary cable connecting the distribution transformer to the feeder 
pillar), the secondary line (the secondary cable connecting the feeder pillar to the 
service pillar), and the LV secondary cable and service drop. However, since the main cable 
and LV secondary line are three phase, losses are relatively low when compared to single 
phase connections serving the same amount of load. KEMA estimates that secondary losses 
represent 57.46% of the TEC annual technical losses.
 Photo: KEMA
Revenue Collection
Revenue collection level is generally good but improvements are possible. The installation of smart 
meters as discussed in 6.4 above will assist in this regard. An improved billing management system is 
planned including the setting up of a communication system with TEC offices on the Outer Islands. 
Grid Issues
Appendix BAppendix A
Renewable Energy 
Projects
Appendix CAppendix A
Renewable Energy Projects
The Renewable Energy projects completed up to and including 2012 and planned for 2013 with 
secured funding are listed below:
a) 40 kWp grid connected PV- Funafuti, 2008. E8 funded
b) Wind Resource Testing, Funafuti, 2009 – 2010;
c) 46 kWp hybrid PV/diesel/battery- Vaitupu, 2010. Italy/Austria funded.
d) 66 kWp grid connected PV (with Hitachi RO Desalination Plant) - Funafuti, 2012/13. PEC 
funded
e) 4 kWp on REEE Demonstration Fale – Funafuti, 2013. UNDP (SIDS-DOCK) funded.
f) 40 kWp grid connected PV -Funafuti, 2012. Russia-funded
g) 9kWp stand-alone solar PV desalination plant, 2012. AUSAid/UK/USA funded.
110 kWp Project 2012
One of the projects planned for 2012, but now delayed, was a co-funded project for 110 kWp 
PV solar with battery backing on three Outer Islands, Nukulaelae, Nukufetau and Nui, plus a 
demonstration PV array at TMTI on Amatuku Island. Arrangements for co-funding from a number of 
donors are under discussion. Estimated cost is in the order of € 2.5 million.
Renewable Energy Projects
Appendix CAppendix A
Tuvalu Electricity 
Corporation Data
Appendix DAppendix A
TEC 2010 Data
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation Data
Appendix DAppendix A Tuvalu Electricity Corporation Data
Appendix D
Funafuti Generators
Funafuti has three operational generators with ratings of 600 kW each. These generators were 
donated by Japan in 2006 and are now (in 2012) due for their first major overhaul. This power 
station runs 24 hours a day and has typical loads of 900 kW during the day, peaking at 1000 kW, and 
about 500 kW at night, dropping to about 400 kW. TEC’s head office is located at the power station.Appendix A
Appendix D
TEC Renewable Energy Master Plan 2009-2018
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation DataAppendix A
Appendix D
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation DataAppendix A
Appendix D
Tuvalu Electricity Corporation DataAppendix A
Appendix E
Extract from Tuvalu 
National Energy PolicyAppendix A
Established: August 2009
Endorsed by Hon. Kausea Natano, Minister for Public Utilities and Industries
The following is an extract of the National Energy Policy:
Vision
“By the year 2020 guided by the principles in the “Te Kakeega II” and the “Malefatunga 
Declaration”, Tuvalu shall attain a prosperous living standard that is fostered through an energy 
policy that promotes the provision of socially, financially, economically, technically, politically and 
environmentally sustainable energy systems and [is] within the framework of the Tuvalu Initial 
National Communication under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change (Oct 1999).”
The following are relevant extracts of Tuvalu’s National Energy Policy, where it relates to REEE.
Goal
To improve the well-being of the Tuvalu people by promoting the use of its renewable energy 
resources and implementing cost effective, equitable, reliable, accessible, affordable, secure and 
environmentally sustainable energy systems.
Principles of Policy
a) Sustainability
b) Gender Equity
c) Environmental Compatibility
d) Stakeholder Participation
e) Good Governance
f) Cultural and Traditional Compatibility
Key Strategic Areas
1. Energy Sector Planning, Co-ordination and Management
2. Petroleum
3. Transport
4. Electricity
Policies
4.1 Ensure that the Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (TEC) operates as a commercial power 
utility and is able to provide a cost-effective and reliable electricity supply to meet
the electricity demand within Funafuti and the outer islands.
4.2 Ensure that all power supply systems in Tuvalu operate with strict adherence to 
established environmental guidelines
4.3 Encourage the use of alternative fuels and renewable energy sources for power 
generation.
5. Renewable Energy
Policies
5.1 Promote and implement the use of appropriate, proven, affordable and cost-effective 
renewable energy technologies both for urban and rural applications.
Extract from Tuvalu National Energy Policy
Appendix EAppendix A
5.3 Ensure Tuvalu’s limited biomass, copra bio-fuel and other renewable energy resources 
are used efficiently, in an economically, environmentally and culturally sustainable 
manner.
5.4 Develop local expertise in the installation, operation, management and maintenance of 
technically and economically proven renewable energy systems.
5.5 Develop partnerships with potential foreign and local investors, donors, and agencies in 
seeking funding sources for the development of renewable energy programmes.
5.6 Develop an implementation plan to realise the target of 100% of electricity generation 
through renewable energy technologies by 2020.
6. Energy Conservation and Efficiency
Policies
6.1 Promote energy conservation and efficiency programmes in all sectors of the economy.
6.2 Ensure that energy conservation and efficiency measures are incorporated in TEC 
operations including generation, transmission and distribution.
6.3 Promote the use of renewable energy as a means to achieve energy efficiency where 
attainable.
6.4 Promote public awareness in conservation and efficiency measures.
6.5 Promote the use of energy saving measures including the use of efficient appliances and 
equipment.
6.6 Develop an energy efficiency and energy conservation target to assist in realising the 
100% renewable energy target for power generation.
Appendix E
Extract from Tuvalu National Energy Policy