File Name: TZA-NREP-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: United Republic of Tanzania
Country Code: TZA
Category: NREP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2017
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2050
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Unless otherwise stated, material in this publication may be freely used, shared, copied, reproduced, printed and/or stored, provided that 
appropriate acknowledgement is given of IRENA as the source and copyright holder. Material in this publication that is attributed to third 
parties may be subject to separate terms of use and restrictions, and appropriate permissions from these third parties may need to be 
secured before any use of such material. 
About IRENA 
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries 
in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and serves as the principal platform for international cooperation, a 
centre of excellence, and a repository of policy, technology, resource and financial knowledge on renewable energy. 
IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy, 
geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy, in the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access, 
energy security and low-carbon economic growth and prosperity. 
ISBN 978-92-9260-020-4
Citation: IRENA (2017), Renewables Readiness Assessment: United Republic of Tanzania, International Renewable 
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi.
About RRA
A Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) is a holistic evaluation of a country’s conditions and identifies the actions 
needed to overcome barriers to renewable energy deployment. This is a country-led process, with IRENA primarily 
providing technical support and expertise to facilitate consultations among different national stakeholders. While the 
RRA helps to shape appropriate policy and regulatory choices, each country determines which renewable energy 
sources and technologies are relevant and consistent with national priorities. The RRA is a dynamic process that 
can be adapted to each country’s circumstances and needs. Experience in a growing range of countries and regions, 
meanwhile, has allowed IRENA to continue refining the basic RRA methodology.
In June 2013, IRENA published a guide for countries seeking to conduct the process in order to accelerate their 
renewable energy deployment.
For more information: www.irena.org/rra
Acknowledgement
This report has benefited greatly from the input of national and international experts, notably including Yacob Mulugetta 
(University College London) and Jensen Shuma (Tanzania Traditional Energy Development Organization/TaTEDO), as 
well as review and comments by Kabaka Kato (Tanzania Geothermal Development Company/TGDC), Maneno Katyega 
(Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited/TANESCO), Paul Kiwele (Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Tanzania), 
Kudakwashe Ndhlukula (SADC Centre for Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency/SACREEE) and James Ngeleja 
(independent expert, Tanzania). IRENA colleagues including Rabia Ferroukhi, Arslan Khalid, Joanne Jungmin Lee, Alvaro 
Lopez-Peña, Asami Miketa, Spyridon Pantelis, Gurbuz Gonul, Henning Wuester and Sakari Oksanen have also provided 
valuable guidance and input.
Contributing authors: Safiatou Alzouma Nouhou, Tijana Radojicic and Nopenyo Esselasse Dabla (IRENA)
For further information or to provide feedback: publications@irena.org
Disclaimer
This publication and the material herein are provided “as is”. All reasonable precautions have been taken by IRENA to verify the reliability 
of the material in this publication. However, neither IRENA nor any of its officials, agents, data or other third-party content providers 
provides a warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, and they accept no responsibility or liability for any consequence of use of 
the publication or material herein. 
The information contained herein does not necessarily represent the views of the Members of IRENA. The mention of specific companies 
or certain projects or products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by IRENA in preference to others of a similar 
nature that are not mentioned. The designations employed and the presentation of material herein do not imply the expression of any FOREWORD
from the Minister of 
Energy and Minerals
Tanzania is endowed with diverse forms of renewable energy resources, 
ranging from hydropower and geothermal to solar, wind and bioenergy. This 
potential has not been fully exploited. Tapping more of these sustainable 
resources will facilitate Tanzania’s economic transformation, which aims to 
make it a middle-income country in the next decade. 
Energy is a vital input to all sustainable development goals. It needs to be 
affordable in economic terms, as well as cleaner and sustainable. Some 
of the country’s conventional energy sources, such as coal, are yet to be 
exploited. However, our enormous renewable energy potential also needs to 
be promoted. Our energy mix should include all available resources, with the 
renewable energy contribution gradually increasing.
With these aims in mind, Tanzania approached the International Renewable 
Energy Agency (IRENA), undertaking to conduct the Renewables Readiness 
Assessment (RRA) process with IRENA’s support. Completion of the process 
will help to establish an effective framework and stimulate stakeholder 
efforts to accelerate our energy transition.
As a country, we are very much committed to this, as evidenced by numerous 
projects and our subscription to Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) and 
other international initiatives. I am confident the present assessment will 
complement our existing efforts and even help us develop our renewable 
energy resources at a faster pace.The RRA process was the first of its kind in Tanzania, allowing for progressive 
dialogue amongst various stakeholders countrywide. It helped to identify 
specific opportunities and potential, along with barriers and constraints, for 
the country’s renewable energy development. Areas for action over the short 
to medium term include resource assessments and planning; policy and 
regulatory frameworks; private sector engagement; and human capacities 
and skills related to renewables. 
I sincerely hope this report will garner wider international support, thereby 
helping to increase investment in our renewable energy sector. Tanzania is 
grateful to IRENA for facilitating the RRA process and is committed, as part of 
efforts to boost renewable energy deployment, to complete the ratification 
process and become a full member of IRENA.
Hon. Prof. Sospeter M. Muhongo (MP)
Minister for Energy and Minerals
United Republic of TanzaniaFOREWORD
from the IRENA
Director-General
The United Republic of Tanzania, like many African countries, faces a number 
of pressing challenges, such as a growing population, accelerating economic 
activity and rising energy demand. Tanzania has recognised renewables as 
an important means to meet these challenges and achieve a sustainable 
energy future.
Harnessing Tanzania’s vast renewable energy potential energy offers the 
prospect of expanded energy access and secure domestic energy supplies, 
sufficient to meet and even exceed the targets set out in the country’s 
development vision for 2025. 
This Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA), undertaken in co-operation 
with the government of Tanzania, examines the energy sector holistically, 
identifying barriers and highlighting actions to accelerate renewable energy 
deployment. It presents clear and practical steps for Tanzania to make 
maximum use of renewables to power sustainable economic growth
In this regard, the report underlines the need to revise the country’s current 
energy plans, taking into account the latest analysis on renewable resource 
potential and technology costs. It identifies dedicated incentive and riskmitigation frameworks as necessary measures to attract private finance 
and investment. The report highlights the need to expand renewable 
energy training at higher and vocational education levels, as well as on-thejob training schemes, given that the uptake of new technologies calls for specialised training and education. The RRA also proposes the establishment 
of a national renewable energy research institute to collect and make 
available all relevant statistics and resource information on renewables. 
Some 30 countries, spanning the Asia-Pacific region, Latin America, the 
Caribbean, the Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa, have undertaken 
Renewables Readiness Assessments (RRAs) since 2011, exchanging 
knowledge and encouraging international co-operation to promote clean, 
indigenous renewable energy technologies. RRA consultations are countryled, with IRENA providing technical support and expertise to facilitate 
consultations among different national stakeholders.
IRENA wishes to thank Tanzanian authorities, in particular the Ministry of 
Energy and Minerals, for their commitment to this report. We are grateful for 
their positive engagement and valuable input. 
I sincerely hope these RRA findings will strengthen the pursuit of renewable 
energy solutions. IRENA stands ready to work closely with Tanzania as the 
country strives for a sustainable energy future.
Adnan Z. Amin
Director-General
International Renewable Energy AgencyCONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
1.1. Country background 01
1.2 Role of energy in development in Tanzania 02
1.3 Rewewables Readiness Assessment process 03
01
ENERGY CONTEXT
2.1 Regional context 05
2.2 Energy supply and demand in Tanzania 07
2.3 Electricity sector 09
2.4 Renewable energy resources 14
02
RECOMMENDED ACTIONS 05
REFERENCES 06
FIGURES VIII
TABLES VIII
ABBREVIATIONS IX
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY XI
03 ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR 
RENEWABLE ENERGY
3.1 Key energy stakeholders and institutional set-up 25
3.2 Energy policies and regulatory framework 27
3.3 Financing and investment 29
04 EMERGING ISSUES AFFECTING 
RENEWABLE ENERGY DEPLOYMENT
4.1 Resource assessment and planning 31
4.2 Planning 33
4.3 Policy and regulatory frameworks 35
4.4 Private sector involvement 38
4.5 Human capacity and skills 41
01
05
25
31
45
48Figures
Figure 1 Per capita GDP growth in member states of eastern African 
sub-region, 2000-2011 05
Figure 2 Electricity access rates in selected countries in eastern Africa 06
Figure 3 Total primary energy supply in Tanzania, 2012 08
Figure 4 Final energy consumption in Tanzania, 2012 09
Figure 5 Oil product consumption in Tanzania, 2012 09
Figure 6 Institutional framework and market structure of the electricity sector 10
Figure 7 Electricity generation by energy source in Tanzania, 2012 11
Figure 8 Electricity consumption by sector in Tanzania, 2012 11
Figure 9a Location of geothermal prospects in Tanzania 16
Figure 9b Tanzania’s geothermal resources 17
Figure 10 Wind map of Tanzania 17
Figure 11 Wind energy zones in Tanzania 19
Figure 12 Global solar irradiation in Tanzania 19
Figure 13 Concentrated solar power zones in Tanzania 20
Figure 14 Solar PV zones in Tanzania 20
Figure 15 Woodfuel resource density in Tanzania in tonnes per hectare 22
Figure 16 Retirement schedule of existing and plants under construction 33
Figure 17 Capacity balance according to IRENA’s assessment 34
Figure 18 Total undiscounted system costs according to IRENA’s assessment 35
Figure 19 TANESCO liquidity ratios, 2010-2013 36
Figure 20 TANESCO debt-to-asset and equity-to-asset ratios 36
Figure 21 Profitability ratios, 2011-2013 36
Figure 22 Renewables-based power generation market in Tanzania 38
Figure 23 New build renewable asset finance in Tanzania by type 38
Figure 24a Estimates for jobs in renewable electricity by technology and year 41
Figure 24b Breakdown of jobs by technology in 2030 42
Figure 25 Renewable energy jobs in 2030 by value chain segment 42
TABLES
Table 1 NELSAP’s pipeline of power development and trade projects at 
pre-investment stage 07
Table 2 Present and projected installed capacity by year 2025 12
Table 3 Electricity tariffs 14
Table 4 Overview of small hydropower projects in Tanzania 15
Table 5 Wind resources in Tanzania 18
Table 6 Policies and legislation which affects the renewable energy sector 27
Table 7 Estimated installed capacity potential (MW) for wind, solar PV, and 
solar CSP at various thresholds of resource quality 32
Table 8 LCOE ranges of renewable energy zones 32
Table 9 Financial ratio comparison table for sample utilities of southern and 
eastern Africa 37
Table 10 Renewable energy higher education courses 42
FIGURES AND TABLESAfDB African Development Bank
CO2 carbon dioxide
COMESA Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
CSP Concentrated Solar Power
DRC Democratic Republic of the Congo
EWURA Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority
GDP gross domestic product
GW gigawatt 
GWh gigawatt-hour
IPP independent power producer
km kilometre
kV kilovolt
KW kilowatt 
kWh kilowatt-hour
LBNL Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (US)
m3 cubic metre
MW megawatt
NELSAP Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program
O&M operation and maintenance
pcm per calendar month
RRA Renewables Readiness Assessment
SAPP Southern African Power Pool
SPPA small power purchase agreement
TaTEDO Tanzania Traditional Energy Development Organization
TPES total primary energy supply
TZS Tanzanian shilling
USD US dollar 
TOU Time-of-Use
TPES Total Primary Energy Supply
USD United States Dollars
Wp Watt-peak
ABBREVIATIONSSolar photovoltaic installations serve remote communitiesEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The United Republic of Tanzania (referred to throughout this report as 
“Tanzania”) is situated in eastern Africa. Of its 50.76 million inhabitants, 
only 18% have access to electricity. At the same time, the country’s economy 
is diversifying and shifting away from its agricultural base. This has added 
considerable pressure to energy consumption, making the low access rate 
and other supply limitations an obstacle to economic growth.
Total primary energy supply (TPES) is dominated by biomass and has almost 
doubled in the last decade. Electricity is mainly generated from hydropower, 
oil and more recently natural gas. Costly oil products account for around
one-fifth of power generation and are mainly required for off-grid applications 
and emergency on-grid power supply. The electrical supply varies in times 
of drought and is highly dependent on hydropower generation, leading to 
rolling blackouts. What is more, a quarter of power produced is lost due 
to the state of the grid infrastructure. The unreliability of power supply has 
had a negative impact on the development of Tanzanian industry. Although 
Tanzania has excellent wind, solar, geothermal and biomass resources for 
power production, only 4.85% of non-hydropower renewables are being 
considered in the Electricity Industry Reform Roadmap to 2025.
The country’s abundant renewable energy potential offers the possibility to 
overcome some of the challenges faced by the energy and power sector in a 
cost-effective way. This would lead Tanzania towards economic growth that 
is sustainable. 
A renewable energy zoning study carried out by the International Renewable 
Energy Agency (IRENA) and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
(LBNL) found that wind power in Tanzania could displace much of the 
oil-based power at a third of the cost, due to the high correlation of wind 
resources with system demand (IRENA and LBNL, 2015). An examination 
of the characteristics of the least-cost energy system for Tanzania found 
that utility-scale solar PV and wind projects could reach 3.7 gigawatts (GW) 
and 1.9 GW by 2030, alongside 694 megawatts (MW) of gas-fuelled power 
plant investment already in the pipeline. This analysis supports the need to 
reduce the expansion of coal and oil-fired power plants in order to reach the 
least-cost scenario. IRENA estimates that the overall share of renewables 
in electricity production, including large hydropower, could reach 78% by 
2030. This would require investments of USD 11.4 billion in generation and
USD 6.7 billion in transmission and distribution investment between 2013 
and 2030. The average generation cost would fall by 17% between 2013 and 
2030. This calls for a revision of the existing electricity master plan as well a 
roadmap to realise the desired least-cost power system investment strategy. 
On the policy and regulatory framework side, the draft Electricity Systems 
Operations Act 2016, under approval, gives priority for dispatch to the 
electricity generated from renewable energy sources and indigenous sources. 
However, this act does not specify guidelines for the power forecast period. 
Despite the existence of feed-in tariffs and small power purchase agreements 
(SPPAs) for grid-connected projects, renewables-based power generation is 
unattractive to private investors. This is due to the weak financial position 
of TANESCO, the sole off-taker, and the government’s inability to guarantee 
payment if TANESCO defaults. Another barrier to private sector involvement in the 
renewable energy industry is the very restrictive financial 
environment, including the difficulty of obtaining 
investment loans due to the high cost of borrowing. 
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) 
discussions also disclosed that the financial sector’s 
limited knowledge of renewables is another obstacle to 
facilitating financing for renewable energy development 
in Tanzania. This is because most domestic banks 
still lack the capacity to plan, structure and appraise 
projects with suitable financial instruments. There are 
no established quality control and technical standards 
or mechanisms for renewable energy equipment. If 
policy measures are not taken, substandard products 
will flood the market, affecting the confidence of 
developers who invest in renewable energy and 
technology uptake. Other factors restricting renewables 
investments include the low purchasing power of 
potential customers, especially in rural areas, and the 
high upfront investment costs of renewable energy. 
Equally obstructive are lengthy project development 
lead times, high land acquisition costs and cumbersome 
procedures for environmental impact assessment and 
hydropower water use rights permits.
There are also shortcomings in human capacities and 
skills in the renewable energy sector in Tanzania. These 
will need to be resolved adequately so that Tanzania can 
meet the employment levels required by the Electricity 
Supply Industry Reform Strategy and Roadmap 2014-
2025 and beyond. According to the analysis carried 
out for this report, the renewable electricity sector 
could employ 36,000 people throughout the value 
chain in Tanzania in 2030 under the renewable energy 
scenario. This is around six times the 2015 figure. 
However, only the University of Dar es Salaam offers a 
Master of Science in Renewable Energy at the moment, 
while other academic institutions in Tanzania only 
offer undergraduate diplomas for the sector. Given 
the potential for scaling up renewables in Tanzania, 
more courses related to renewables are needed. These 
courses should diversify and expand into all areas of 
renewable energy project development at the technical, 
managerial and financial level.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Revise national energy plans
Energy planners in Tanzania need to revise their plans 
by taking into account the latest studies on resource 
potential and technology costs. Equally, they need to 
explore different policy assumptions and scenarios 
that justify or work out the challenge associated with 
certain investment decisions. This could be followed by 
a roadmap for realising the desired investment strategy. 
Provide incentives in Electricity System 
Operation Rules
The draft Electricity System Operation Rules 2016 need 
to be revised to include provisions in forecasts for better 
integrating renewable energy in power systems. These 
need to take into account the fact that Tanzania is a 
member of the Southern African Power Pool (SAPP), 
where the day-ahead market is already in place. This 
will give renewables the opportunity to make a greater 
contribution to satisfying the country’s growing power 
demand.
In achieve this aim, Tanzania could consider acquiring 
the necessary infrastructure including sophisticated 
information and communication tools for more efficient 
system-wide decision-making. Furthermore, grid 
operators will need to acquire the ability to integrate 
forecast data into their daily operations by learning 
how to manipulate grids with high share of renewables. 
Tanzania should consider adopting transmission and 
wheeling charges conducive to variable renewables. 
This should be clearly stated in the revision of the draft 
Electricity Systems Operations Act 2016. Additionally, 
private generators could be given the flexibility to sell 
their surplus power to the grid operator.
Promote long-term equity financing for renewable 
energy projects through non-banking financial 
institutions
Tanzania could consider empowering the domestic 
financial sector to provide equity investments into 
renewable energy technologies, especially through 
the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange. This would be 
welcomed by the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, 
which has appealed for an environment favouring 
the increased utilisation of the stock exchange by the 
private sector,1
 supervised by the Capital Markets and 
Securities Authority. Through the Dar es Salaam Stock 
Exchange, the government should also promote the use 
of mutual funds, which currently only represent 0.1% 
of asset allocation in the Tanzanian financial systems. 
These would increase private sector participation by 
using pooling to reduce renewable energy project risk.
Improve facilitation, collaboration and co-ordination 
among private sector and financial institutions
In line with the previous recommendation, a framework 
must be established to enhance facilitation, collaboration 
and co-ordination among private renewable energy 
actors and financial institutions. This would increase 
financial institution knowledge of the renewable energy 
sector and give the private sector more understanding 
of the inner workings of the financial system. Close 
co-operation of this kind between these two types of 
entities will help mitigate the perceived risk from the 
renewable energy sector and would foster financing.Create a risk mitigation mechanism for local 
investments
In order to increase participation from the local private 
sector, a risk mitigation mechanism is needed for 
local investments. It could provide liquidity support as 
well as guarantees and facilitate access to substantial 
loans from the banking industry. The facility could be 
established at a regional level through the Common 
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) 
Regional Investment Agency. COMESA could
co-operate with international partners, such as IRENA, 
the Green Climate Fund, German development bank 
KfW and the African Trade Insurance Agency.
Intensify and expand renewable energy training at 
the higher and vocational educational levels as well 
as on-the-job training 
The planning scenarios suggested in this RRA show that 
by 2030 around 20,000 construction and installation 
jobs will be required in Tanzania for the renewable energy 
sector. Around 1,100 will be needed in fuel production, 
2,900 in manufacturing, 4,000 in decommissioning and 
7,900 in operation and maintenance. The Government of 
Tanzania should make full use of the vocational training 
facilities across the country to intensify and expand 
renewables training to meet that labour demand. A 
renewable energy programme should be promoted 
within the country’s top business schools. It should 
develop training programmes and courses to broaden 
the financial and business knowledge base in renewable 
energy technology projects. New and young engineers 
entering the local power job market should be given the 
opportunity to gain experience in the practical aspects 
of the value chain. Capacity improvement at the 
vocational education level could be financed through 
charges applied to foreign investments and through 
state funding and other sources.
Design and implement local-content requirements for 
renewable energy projects
Through a local-content requirement, people could gain 
better conditions like job security, for which demand 
will rise if more qualified labour becomes available. The 
local-content requirement could be applied to labour 
and manufactured products for renewable energy 
projects implemented in Tanzania. There are several 
examples of this in countries in the sub-Saharan African 
region, such as Ghana, Kenya and South Africa.
Establish a national renewable energy 
research centre
Given the inconsistency of statistical data and lack of 
quality control or standard-setting mechanism, the 
Government of Tanzania should create and provide the 
capacity for a renewable energy centre whose mandate 
would be as follows: 
• establish a legal and institutional framework for 
assembling renewable energy statistics
• collect and store all relevant statistics and resource 
information on renewables
• provide easier access to renewable energy 
information and resolve inconsistencies in the data
• conduct a data audit to identify relevant data gaps
• develop and implement a methodology for quality 
control and standards.
1 Corporate bonds and most of the equity and government 
bond papers issued and listed on the Dar es Salaam Stock 
Exchange have been oversubscribed by up to twice the
amount available. This shows the extent of liquidity in the 
hands of the Tanzanian private sector. Elephants crossing a river in Serengeti National Park
TanzaniaI. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Country Background
Located in eastern Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania (referred to 
throughout this report as “Tanzania”) is bordered by Kenya and Uganda to 
the north, Rwanda, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) 
and Zambia to the west, Malawi and Mozambique to the south and the Indian 
Ocean to the east. With a surface area of 947,303 square kilometres (km2
), it 
is the largest country in East Africa in terms of land mass.
The country was formed out of the union of Tanganyika and Zanzibar on 26 
April 1964. Tanzania is a presidential constitutional republic and since 1996 
has had its official capital at Dodoma. In the coastal region, the city of Dar 
es Salaam is the economic capital and main seaport of mainland Tanzania, 
serving as a gateway to East and Central Africa. The official currency is the 
Tanzanian Shilling (TZS) and the official language is Kiswahili/Swahili, while 
English is widely used for official communication (www.tanzania.go.tz).
Tanzania is mountainous and densely forested in the northeast. The centre of 
the country consists of a large plateau with plains, savannah woodlands and 
arable land, and the eastern coast is hot and humid. Three of Africa’s Great 
Lakes are partly within Tanzania, namely Nyasa, Tanganyika and Victoria. 
Given its geographic configuration, Tanzania is vulnerable to climate change 
and extreme weather events. As a result, Tanzania’s hydroelectric capacity 
has been dramatically affected (AfDB, 2015). However, Tanzania has among 
lowest per capita carbon dioxide (CO2
) emissions in the world at just
0.2 metric tonnes.2
The United Nations ranks it as a Least Developed Country with annual per 
capita gross domestic product (GDP) at USD 879. According to the World 
Bank, 43.5% of the population lived on less than USD 1.25 a day3
 in 2012, 
making it one of the poorest countries in the world. Its population of
50.76 million (2014) is growing at 2.8% per year, and about 27.6% of the 
population is urban (World Bank, 2015a). Forecasts by Tanzania’s Ministry of 
Energy and Minerals suggest that the country’s population will rise to at least 
69.5 million by 2025 (MEM, 2014). 
The Tanzanian economy has continuously performed well over the last 
few years, with a growth of 6.9% in 2012 and 7.3% in 2013. Information and 
communications, as well as construction and manufacturing, are the main 
contributors to this growth. Inflation has declined to an annual average of 5.6% 
in 2015 due to a careful monetary policy, favourable agricultural conditions 
and falling oil prices. Growth is projected to reach 7.2% in 2016 and 7.5% in 
2017 (AfDB, OECD and UNDP, 2015). In order to sustain that growth, public 
investments will become increasingly necessary, especially in infrastructure.
Agriculture is the most important economic sector, employing more than twothirds of the country’s workforce and supporting the livelihoods of more than 
three-quarters of Tanzanians (AfDB, OECD and UNDP, 2015). It is followed by 
services (information and communication), mining and manufacturing. 
2 Emissions per capita for sub-Saharan Africa amounted to 0.8 metric tonnes of CO2 per 
year. The annual average for Low Income Countries was 0.3 metric tonnes of CO2 in 
2011 (World Bank, 2015a).The Government of Tanzania is going through an 
economic restructuring process to improve the 
investment environment and increase the role of the 
private sector, with the government limiting itself to 
a facilitating and regulatory function. In addition, the 
government has been implementing the “Big Results 
Now” initiative4 since 2013, which aims to foster 
progress in key development sectors, including energy. 
This strategy is aligned with Tanzania’s Development 
Vision 2025, which aims to convert Tanzania to a 
middle-income country by 2025 with a GDP per capita 
of at least USD 3,000. 
The good economic performance of recent years 
has not necessarily accelerated poverty reduction. 
Disparities still exist between rural and urban areas, 
better off and disadvantaged regions (AfDB, OECD and 
UNDP, 2015). Natural disasters like droughts and El Niño 
climatic events have affected agricultural productivity, 
power production and transportation, and this has 
had negative effects on the economy. However, at this 
stage, widespread and persistent poverty is the main 
development obstacle for Tanzania. Through recent 
policy initiatives, the Government of Tanzania has 
shown an increased level of commitment to broader 
poverty reduction, greater social protection and the 
human development agenda. Public expenditure on 
infrastructure, energy and increased rural electrification 
is being promoted. This is viewed as a key development 
vector for poverty elimination and the economic 
inclusion of the rural population.
1.2 Role of energy in development 
in Tanzania
Energy is a critical input affecting all sustainable 
development efforts. As is the case across the world, 
energy is vital to all major economic activities in 
Tanzania.
• Energy for services
Services are the main contributor to GDP, 
taking a 48.8% share in 2014 (Tanzania National 
Bureau of Statistics, 2015). The information and 
communications subsector has experienced 
sustained growth in the usage of mobile phones. 
This includes the recent expansion in mobile money 
services, which had around 11.7 million registered 
users in March 2014 (AfDB, OECD and UNDP, 2015). 
Energy is also essential for a number of social 
welfare services, which include health, schools, water 
and telecommunications in rural areas. Renewable 
energy could provide the basis for satisfying those 
needs. Some social services, such as remote health 
centres, are already equipped with PV for lighting 
or storing medical supplies. Some PV units are also 
used in water pumping. As they grow, social services 
will need to improve and become more reliable and 
more sustainable.For energy to play an effective role 
in poverty alleviation, emphasis should be put on 
improving energy services in productive uses such 
as business, agriculture, industry, fishing and tourism.
• Energy for agriculture
Agriculture is the most important sector of the 
Tanzanian economy. The agricultural activities 
include land preparation, irrigation, weeding, 
harvesting and processing agricultural products. 
The sector employs about 80% of the active 
workforce that supports the livelihoods of more 
than three-quarters of the population in Tanzania. It 
contributed to about 23% of GDP in 2014 and meets 
about 95% of national food requirements (Tanzania 
National Bureau of Statistics, 2015). The sector has 
consistently registered a below average annual 
growth rate over the last decade, amounting to 4%. 
This is due to factors such as the limited availability 
of energy and absence of modern agricultural 
methods, leading to a high reliance on rainfall. 
About 70% of cultivation in Tanzania is carried 
out by hand hoe, 20% by ox plough and 10% by 
tractors (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development, 2011). The government has 
launched a new initiative, the Southern Agricultural 
Growth Corridor of Tanzania, in order to meet the 
annual sector growth rate of 6% - 10% in its New 
Vision for agriculture. Its aim is to steer public 
and private sector initiatives investment initiatives 
using the model of an agricultural growth corridor 
to boost agricultural productivity in Tanzania. The 
Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania 
investment generation programme has identified 
power generation as one of the key areas that 
increases agricultural productivity. This will help to 
reverse the current high reliance on human energy 
for these agricultural activities. 
• Energy for industry
Over time, Tanzania’s industrial sector has changed, 
mirroring national policy reforms as well as the 
changing patterns of domestic demand and the 
global market. It is the third largest contributor to 
the economy (22.2% of GDP in 2014) after services 
and agriculture. Recovery in the mining sector 
continued in 2014, mainly due to increased gold 
production and higher international prices. Thanks 
to the sustained stability in power generation as well 
as sustained demand for manufactured products 
both abroad and at home, the performance of the 
manufacturing sector has remained strong. 
4 Launched in 2013, the “Big Results Now” initiative is based on 
a Malaysian development model and altered to fit the
Tanzanian context.Rural Tanzania’s most commonplace industries have 
major relevance to rural sustainable development 
efforts. They include brick burning, crop processing 
and the production of charcoal, among other 
activities. These have the potential to raise rural 
incomes by processing agricultural and forest 
products to add value. Hence energy is important for 
both urban and rural development. It is among the 
most widely used inputs, and the industrial sector is 
the second large consumer of energy in Tanzania after 
households. The energy used for industries in urban 
areas is mostly electricity. Gas is also used by industry 
in Dar es Salaam. About 70% of electricity is used to 
run machines (motor and other equipment). The rest 
of the electricity is used for other energy services 
(lighting, alarms, offices etc.) in factories. However, old 
or outdated equipment and underutilised capacity in 
most factories leads to inefficient energy use.
Improvement of the power sector as highlighted in 
different government policies, strategies and plans, 
such as the Power Systems Master Plan of 2012, 
is considered essential to ensure sustainability of 
the manufacturing firms. Reliable power supply to 
manufacturing companies will certainly increase 
productivity and the industrial base, which is 
indispensable to the country’s overall development 
agenda. 
• Regional integration
Regional power integration is essential to 
optimising the development of energy resources 
within regional blocks. This will then ease access to 
the electrical power supply through regional power 
interconnection. Certain local obstacles to power 
supply oblige Tanzania to use additional power 
from neighbouring countries with a surplus. It thus 
stands to benefit a great deal from regional power 
integration. Equally, power supply infrastructure 
connectivity within the region can enable surplus 
power produced in Tanzania to be easily exported to 
other countries with a power deficit (MEM, 2015a). 
In 2010, Tanzania joined the Eastern Africa Power 
Pool;5
 however, work on physical interconnection 
and effective electricity exchange within the pool 
is only under way between Uganda and Kenya 
(Gebrehiwot, 2013), and Ethiopia and Djibouti. In 
addition, Tanzania is a member of the Southern 
African Power Pool (SAPP), along with 11 other 
African nations.6
 This is an advantage because 
it implies that Tanzania could act as a “bridge” 
country interconnecting both electricity pools in the 
medium term, thus linking northern and southern 
areas of Africa. 
1.3 Renewables Readiness 
Assessment process
The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA) in 
Tanzania was led by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals in 
close co-operation with the Tanzania Traditional Energy 
Development Organization (TaTEDO). TaTEDO has 
acted as an interface between Tanzanian stakeholders 
and the RRA support team. Following recommendations 
from stakeholders, including the Ministry of Energy and 
Minerals and several donors, the RRA was conducted 
with a special focus on implementation. Rather than 
focusing on specific pairings of resources and services, 
the assessment examined several broad thematic areas, 
namely resource assessment and planning; policy and 
regulatory frameworks; private sector involvement; and 
human capacity and skills. 
At the first stage, a background and issues paper on 
Tanzania was prepared. This was based on desktop 
research information and a survey conducted through 
a field mission, which consisted of interviews of 
representatives of key stakeholder institutions from 
key governmental, private and civil society bodies. The 
survey covered topics such as energy sources and access 
levels; main renewable energy applications and service 
demands; and the main challenges affecting renewable 
energy development. Due to time constraints, field 
respondents were asked to independently complete 
the remaining questions covering costs, capacity gaps 
and other subjects. They were requested to return the 
completed questionnaires within two working weeks 
of the day of the interview. A final RRA workshop was 
organised on 9 - 10 March 2016 to peer review and 
validate the findings from the background paper and 
issues paper. It defined the practical action that will set 
these renewable energy subsectors in motion. 
This report is structured into five sections. The first 
presents the introduction, covering country background 
and the RRA process in Tanzania. The second highlights 
the regional energy setting and examines Tanzania’s 
national energy sector and specific energy challenges. It 
offers an overview of the country’s renewable energy use 
at present, as well as its potential. This entails a detailed 
discussion of the electricity sector. The third section 
identifies institutions playing a part in Tanzania’s energy 
sector and defines key energy policies and regulatory 
frameworks, as well as examining finance and investment 
conditions in Tanzania. The fourth section discusses RRA 
findings related to emerging concerns and enabling 
conditions in the four thematic areas identified. It sums 
up the related opportunities and constraints. Finally, the 
fifth section covers the recommended action necessary 
for scaling up renewable energy in Tanzania.Modern bioenergy offers great development potential2. ENERGY CONTEXT
2.1 Regional context
Most countries in the eastern Africa sub-region7 have exhibited strong 
economic growth trends, with robust increases in per capita GDP over 
the last decade (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2014). 
Between 2000 and 2011, Burundi, the Comoros, the DRC, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Kenya and Rwanda have more than doubled their per capita GDP while the 
GDP of Ethiopia and Rwanda has grown more than 180% in the same period.
In most of the 14 countries of the eastern Africa sub-region, more than 90% of 
the population rely on biomass as their main energy source. The utilisation of 
electricity and other forms of modern energy sources is relatively low. Electricity 
access rates range from 1% in South Sudan (leaving 9.3 million people without 
access) to 11% in the DRC (nearly 60 million without access). In Uganda 12% 
have electricity access, leaving 27 million people without. In Tanzania 18% 
have access, and 38 million do not. In Kenya 16% have access, and more than
32 million do not, while in Ethiopia 22.5% have access, and nearly 64.5 million 
do not (see Figure 2). Energy security has also gained in importance due to the 
increased dependence on imported oil products. Electricity in the eastern Africa 
sub-region has traditionally been generated from hydroelectricity. However, 
inadequate energy planning and rapid energy demand growth have compelled 
the region’s policy makers to make particular technology choices to overcome 
immediate difficulties related to energy. This has resulted in the expansion of 
thermal generation. The absolute growth in petroleum consumption from 
2000 to 2011 amounted to 67% in eastern Africa. This constitutes a significant 
increase in exposure to global energy markets and associated sources of energy 
insecurity (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2014). 
7 The eastern African sub-region referred to in this report consists of Burundi, Comoros, 
Figure 1: Per capita GDP growth in countries of the eastern African 
sub-region
Source: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2014 (based on International 
Monetary Fund and World Economic Outlook data)
200
150
100
50
0
Burundi
Comoros
D.R. Congo
Djibouti
Eritrea
Ethiopea
Kenya
Madagascar
Rwanda
South
Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
Seychelles
2011-2000 % Change
in Per Capita GDPFigure 2: Electricity access rates in selected countries in eastern Africa
Source: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2014 (adapted from World Energy Outlook data, 2011)
South
Sudan
D.R.
Congo
Uganda
Kenya
Tanzania
Madagascar
Ethiopia
Eritrea
12%
16%
1%
11%
18%
19%
23%
32%
The energy sector in eastern Africa faces numerous 
challenges but also abundant opportunities. These 
countries are endowed with significant clean energy 
resources in transboundary hydropower systems that can 
be developed to spearhead energy integration across the 
sub-region. The discovery of oil and gas resources in the 
sub-region, and growing interest in biofuel development, 
also offer a route to greater energy security through 
regional frameworks and infrastructure. 
In 2012, total installed electricity capacity in East 
Africa exceeded 36 gigawatts (GW), including Egypt. 
This generated about 160 terawatt-hours of electricity 
largely from gas-fired power plants. Egypt’s installed 
capacity accounts for more than 70% of the region’s 
total, and hydropower is the main source in Ethiopia, 
Burundi, Uganda and Sudan. After gas and hydropower, 
remaining capacity is mainly based on oil-fired power 
plants, with small contributions from wind and solar 
(IRENA, 2015a). Considering the energy potential of the 
sub-region, regional integration remains low mainly due 
to constrained generation capacity and limited regional 
interconnectivity. Sub-regional electricity trade along 
with joint investment ventures are a promising way to 
expand the electricity supply in the sub-region. 
Bilateral power exchanges exist among some countries 
but interconnections are still limited. Existing power 
interconnections include: the DRC, Burundi and Rwanda; 
Kenya-Uganda; Ethiopia-Djibouti and Ethiopia-Sudan. 
However, a number of power interconnection projects 
are currently under development in line with the Eastern 
Africa Power Pool/ East African Community framework. 
These are expected to bear fruit within the next five to 
ten years. In addition, the Kenya-Tanzania interconnector 
project has secured finance to begin engineering work. 
The line is 260 km long and will have a capacity of 1,520 
megawatts (MW) at 400 kilovolt (kV) alternating current. 
In additionfeasibility studies for the Rusumo-Tanzania 
line were completed in 2010. This line is associated with 
the Rusumo Falls Hydropower Plant (90 MW), which will 
serve and interconnect the grids of Tanzania, Rwanda and 
Burundi (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 
2014). More widely, Tanzania and Zambia are working on 
an interconnector which once completed will interconnect 
the southern Africa regional grid with the eastern Africa 
regional grid. Together with the older interconnections, 
namely Kenya-Uganda, Egypt-Libya and BurundiDRC-Rwanda, the projects in the pipeline will boost the 
interconnection across the eastern Africa region, involving 
all current member countries (IRENA, 2015b).
Nile Basin Initiative 
As a partnership that unites Burundi, the DRC, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania and Uganda, 
the Nile Basin Initiative has launched the Nile Equatorial 
Lakes Subsidiary Action Program (NELSAP). This is one 
of its investment programmes. It promotes investments 
in power development and trade, river basin 
management and development, agricultural trade and 
productivity, and fisheries and watershed management.
In accordance with its 2012 - 2016 Strategic Plan, 
NELSAP has listed the following under its “Power 
Development and Trade” sub-programme:
• Programmatic goal 1: to harness hydropower 
through co-operation
• Programmatic goal 2: to facilitate better 
interconnections and increase power trade
NELSAP continuously detects and lays the ground 
for new projects, aiming to help identify, prepare and 
implement the supervision and facilitation of resource 
mobilisation for investment projects in its two subprogrammes (Nile Basin Initiative, 2012).
Within these programmes, several projects are at 
various stages in the development phase: the Regional 
Rusumo Falls Hydroelectric and Multipurpose Projectthe Kenya-Tanzania Transmission Line, the Iringa-Mbeya 
Power Transmission Line, Uganda-DRC (Nkenda-BeniButembo-Bunia) Power Transmission Line and the 
Tanzania-Zambia Power Transmission Line. In addition, 
NELSAP has identified the pipeline of projects that could 
deliver prominent results. These are listed in Table 1.
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
The COMESA Model Energy Policy Framework, adopted 
by the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa 
(COMESA) in 2007, seeks to improve the effectiveness 
and efficiency of modern energy supply industries; 
the security and reliability of energy supply systems; 
access to affordable and modern energy services as 
a contribution to poverty reduction; the availability, 
potential and demand of various energy resources; 
economic development; energy sector governance 
and administration; and the environmental, safety and 
health impacts of energy production and utilisation. In 
addition, it seeks to soften the impact of high energy 
prices on vulnerable consumers (COMESA, 2008).
Power transmission networks for interconnection, as 
well as several power generation projects, are among 
its regional key infrastructure projects. The ZambiaTanzania-Kenya Power Interconnector in currently in the 
construction phase. This distribution network has several 
aims. Among them, it wishes to promote and stimulate 
the development of new power generation projects and 
electricity export potentialand improve the quality of 
power to northern Zambia and western Tanzania. It wants 
to reinforce the Tanzanian national grid and make the 
country a trading member of the SAPP.
2.2 Energy supply and demand in 
Tanzania
Tanzania is an economy moving away from its 
agricultural base. This has placed considerable pressure 
on energy consumption. Total primary energy supply 
(TPES) climbed from 13.46 million tonnes of oil 
equivalent (mtoe) to 22.16 mtoe in 2012 – an increase 
of almost 100% over the last decade. Figure 3 displays 
the TPES trend over a six-year period, showing the 
continued dominance of biomass as primary energy 
source. According to International Energy Agency 
statistics for Tanzania in 2012, biomass accounted for 
85.5% of TPES, with the remainder distributed between 
petroleum (6.6%), gas (1.5%), hydroelectricity (0.6%), 
and coal and peat (0.2%). This energy supply and enduse structure reflects Tanzania’s level of development, 
with limited industrial and manufacturing activity and 
the dominance of households in energy consumption
Strategic 
area High-level results and key activities Estimated cost (USD million) 
Pre-investment Investment
Hydropower 
generation
and power 
transmission
lines
Semuliki hydropower project (72 MW) (Uganda-DRC) 6
Mugomba hydropower project in the DRC (100 MW) 6
Akanyaru river hydropower (Rwanda and Burundi) 
(22 MW) 3
Project structuring and financial modelling of 
hydropower generation projects in South Sudan 
(Fula, Shukoli, Bedden and Lakki)
8
Uganda (Karuma)-South Sudan (Juba) power 
transmission interconnection, 400 kV of 320 km 3
Kenya (Kisumu)-Tanzania (Mwanza) power transmission 
interconnection, 220 kV of 330 km 3
Burundi (Jiji-Mulembwe)-Tanzania (Kigoma) power 
transmission line, 220 kV of 180 km 2
Kenya-Tanzania transmission, 220 kV of 257 km 262
Uganda-DRC (Nkenda-Beni-Butembo-Bunia) 
transmission line, 220 kV of 396 km 165
Uganda-Tanzania (Masaka-Mwanza) interconnection
Table 1: NELSAP’s pipeline of power development and trade projects at pre-investment stage
Source: Nile Basin Initiative (2012)Figure 3: Total primary energy supply in Tanzania, 2012
Source: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, 2014
2012
2009
2006
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Coal and coal products Oil products Natural Gas Hydropower Primary solid biofuels
Solid biomass in the form of firewood and charcoal is the 
main energy source for cooking. The quantity of firewood 
consumed in rural areas is 26 million cubic metres (m3
). Of 
this, 24 million m3
 is used for household cooking, 2.03 million 
m3
 for rural small and medium-sized enterprises and 14.4 
million m3
 in urban areas – mainly as charcoal. According 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change, only 4% of the biomass used is sustainable out 
of the 90% of solid biomass energy consumed by users. 
Most biomass demand is for household consumption for 
cooking and heating, and the remainder (10%) is used 
by home-based enterprises, commercial, institutional 
and industrial sectors. Experience shows that biomass 
energy will remain a dominant source of energy, at least 
in the medium term. More efforts will thus be needed to 
ensure sustainability of biomass supply (United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2012).
Charcoal is the single largest source of household energy 
in urban areas, representing 20% of total energy use. In 
Dar es Salaam, more than 70% of households are using 
charcoal. The city alone consumes approximately half 
Tanzania’s annual charcoal supply, amounting to around 
500,000 tonnes in 2009 (Renewable Energy and Energy 
Efficiency Partnership, 2014). 
A sector breakdown of energy consumption in Tanzania 
is shown in Figure 4. The residential sector consumes 
about 70% of total energy consumed, amounting to
19.25 mtoe. This high proportion of residential sector 
energy consumption is explained by the use of inefficient 
stoves for cooking with firewood and charcoal. At the 
same time, other economic sectors have low total energy 
consumption. Low energy consumption in the industrial 
and agricultural sectors is characteristic of an economy 
based on subsistence farming and little processing and 
manufacturing activity, which tends to be energy-intensive. 
All Tanzania’s fossil liquid fuels are imported, and 
75% of these are used by the transport sector. Diesel 
amounts to approximately 75% of transport fuels 
used in the country. Trains owned by the two railway 
companies operating in the country, along with a large 
proportion of freight transport vehicles, are fuelled 
by diesel. Smaller household electricity generators 
(“gensets”) run on petrol while larger ones of at least 
10 kilowatts (KW) run on diesel (Renewable Energy 
and Energy Efficiency Partnership, 2014). Oil product
consumption escalated dramatically by over 100% 
between 2000 and 2012 (International Energy Agency, 
2012), with petroleum products comprising 8.1% of 
total final consumption, and electricity accounting for
just 1.9%. 
Tanzanian imports of fossil fuels corresponded to 25% 
of total gross imports, accounting for USD 2.9 billion 
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2012) and 
representing a heavy burden on the country’s finances. 
Diesel for transportation (middle distillates) and fuel oil 
for electricity generation are driving the abrupt increase 
in fossil fuel imports. This is a considerable risk to the 
whole energy sector.
Although currently dependent on imported fossil fuels, 
Tanzania has a wealth of largely unused indigenous 
energy resources. These include hydropower, coal, 
natural gas, uranium, solar, wind and geothermal 
energy. Its hydropower potential is estimated at 4.7 GW, 
coal reserves at about 1,200 million tonnes – of which 
304 million tonnes are proven – and natural gas at more 
than 1.6 trillion m3
 of proven reserves (Government 
of Tanzania, 2014). With appropriate planning and 
utilisation, these resources have the potential to 
contribute to Tanzania’s National Development Vision 
2025 to become a middle-income country.Figure 4: Final energy consumption in
Tanzania, 2012
Source: International Energy Agency, 2012
Commercial and public service
1% Agriculture/Forestry
4% Non-specified
3%
Transport
10%
Industry
8%
Non-energy use
0%
Residential
69%
2.3 Electricity sector
The power sector institutional framework and 
market structure in Tanzania is depicted in Figure 
6. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals is in charge 
of policy formulation while the Energy and Water 
Utilities Regulatory Authority (EWURA) is in charge 
of developing regulations in the power sector and 
monitoring their effective implementation by all 
relevant stakeholders. The national parastate utility, 
TANESCO, owns and operates the main grid and has a 
monopoly over power transmission and distribution of 
electricity generated from its own facilities as well as 
from Independent Power Producers (IPPs). In addition, 
small power producers and stand-alone system 
providers operate in rural areas with the support of the 
Rural Energy Agency.
Figure 5: Oil product consumption in Tanzania, 2012
2 500
2 000
thousand tonnes 1 500
500
0
1 000
1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
Fuel oil Middle distilates Aviation fuels Gasoline LPG** Other**
*Consumption includes international bunkers **LPG includes LPG, NGL, ethane and naptha. Others also include direct use of 
crude oil and other hydrocarbons.
Coal
Tanzania aims for 200 MW of wind 
power capacity by 2025
Photograph: ShutterstockFigure 6: Institutional framework and market structure of the electricity sector
Source: AfDB, 2015; MEM, 2014
Ministry of Energy
and Minerals
Rural Energy
Agency (REA)
Co-funding, capacity
building, pre-investment
support
Stand-Alone
Systems
Service
Providers
Small Power Producers/
Mini-grids Service Providers
Policy Direction Energy & Water Utilities
Regulations Authority (EWURA) Regulations
Stand-Alone
Systems Customers
Tanzania Electric Supply
Company (TANESCO)
Imports IPPs Enforcement
TANESCO
Distribution
Retail Grid and
Mini-Grid Customers
SPPA
SPPA, PPAs & Bulk Tariff
Approval, Licensing
Retail Tariff Approval
Customer Complaints
In Tanzania, the power sector is steered by the National 
Electricity Policy 2015, the Energy and Water Utilities 
Regulatory Authority Act 2001, the Electricity Act 2008 
and Electricity (General) Regulations GN 63. Following 
the enactment of the Electricity Act 2008, EWURA 
devised a number of rules in 2011 for regulating the 
electricity supply services, including among others the 
transmission, generation, distribution and operation of 
such services. The Electricity (Distribution Services) 
Rules 2011 give provisions for the governance of 
regulatory and licensing matters related to the supply 
of electricity distribution services in Tanzania. 
Generation
Electricity in Tanzania is mainly generated from 
hydropower, oil and recently natural gas. The electricity 
supply varies, especially in times of drought, when 
hydropower generation is adversely affected. Nearly 
25% of electricity generated is lost due to poor grid 
infrastructure (MEM, 2013a). The unreliability of 
electricity supply has had a negative impact on the 
development of the Tanzanian industrial sector. By May 
2014, Tanzania’s total installed generation capacity was 
1,591 MW, of which 1,466 MW was available on the grid. 
This was composed of 562 MW of large hydropower 
(35%)527 MW of natural gas (34%) and 495 MW of 
27 MW and 13 MW in biomass and small hydropower 
respectively. Another 300 MW of power generation 
capacity is thought to exist off the grid, mainly from 
diesel engines. TANESCO also imports power from 
Uganda (8 MW), Zambia (5 MW) and Kenya (0.85 MW) 
to distribute to towns near the borders MEM, 2014). 
IPPs and emergency power producers own and operate 
thermal power plants, the total installed capacity of 
which amounts to around 417 MW (MEM, 2015a).
From 1980 to 2002, hydropower accounted for nearly 
all the generation mix. Consequently, the droughts 
that occurred in 2006 and 2010 led to severe power 
supply shortages and a reduction in hydropower share 
to just 35%. TANESCO supplies 59% of total capacity. 
Meanwhile, IPPs, emergency power producers and 
small power producers,8
 which sell wholesale to 
TANESCO, provide 26%, 13% and 2% respectively. To 
close the electricity supply gap, TANESCO contracted 
emergency power producers in 2011. These prove to 
be a relatively expensive option as they are mainly 
generating from diesel. Private sector involvement is 
encouraged. However, the associated generation costs 
exceed USD 0.30 per kilowatt-hour (kWh).
8 Small power producers are IPPs with a capacity of less thanAs a vertically integrated utility, TANESCO generates 
power from its own installations but also acts as a 
single buyer by purchasing from IPPs and small power 
producers. It is also in charge of selling to its own 
customers. The “Big Results Now” initiative proposes 
a drastic restructuring (unbundling) of TANESCO. 
The Electricity Supply Industry Reform Roadmap 
2014 - 2025, prepared by the Ministry of Energy and 
Minerals, suggests to first split TANESCO into two or 
three profit business units (generation, transmission 
and distribution). These would grow into two or three 
separate entities, which will be further divided into 
smaller generation and distribution companies. The 
intention is to increase generation capacity from 1,591 
MW to 2,780 MW by 2025 and give access to electricity 
to five million people in Tanzania. Another aim is to 
eliminate costly reliance on emergency power plants 
and meet new demand through low cost solutions. 
The eventual objective is to make each of the newly 
created companies profitable. They would apply a costreflective tariff, TANESCO’s debts would be reimbursed, 
and the Government of Tanzania would no longer 
provide subsidies to the sector (MEM, 2014). 
Tanzania’s annual per capita power consumption is 
very low, at about 105 kWh in 2014 (MEM, 2014), less 
than half the average in Least Developed Countries. 
Final total electricity consumption in 2012 was 
4,441 gigawatt-hours (GWh). The largest electricity 
consumer was the residential sector at 44% followed 
by industry at 25%, and commercial and public services 
at 23%, Agriculture accounted for only 4% of electricity 
consumption (International Energy Agency, 2012). 
Generation is forecast to increase to 47,723 GWh by 
2035 (MEM, 2013a). According to the National Energy 
Policy 2015installed capacity should be increased to at 
The electricity demand growth rate is 10% - 15% per 
year, and peak demand in 2012 was about 1,041 MW 
(Government of Tanzania, 2014; MEM, 2015). Should 
business-as-usual conditions prevail, TANESCO foresees 
significant demand increases due to mining operations, 
liquefied natural gas plants, factories, water supply and 
household consumers, thus the peak demand would be 
close to 8,000 MW by 2025 (MEM, 2015b). 
The Rural Energy Agency is responsible for 
implementing the rural electrification strategy, which 
mainly concentrates on the extension of the grid and 
mini-grid distribution network in rural areas. In areas 
where grid extension is not feasible, the Rural Energy 
Agency also supports the development of solar PV 
projects in some villagesPilot projects on wind-solar 
Figure 7: Electricity generation by energy source in Tanzania, 2012
Source: International Energy Agency, 2012
6 000
5 000
GWh
4 000
1 000
2 000
0
3 000
1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012
Coal* Oil Natural gas Hydropower Biofuels/waste
*In this graph, peat and oil shale are aggregated with coal.
Figure 8: Electricity consumption by sector in 
Tanzania, 2012
Source: International Energy Agency, 2012
Agriculture
4% Other
4%
Industry
25%
Commercial and
public service
23%
Residential
44%public institutions in rural areas. The Rural Energy 
Agency receives funds from the Government of Tanzania 
and development partners, including the Swedish 
International Development Agency, the World Bank’s 
Tanzania Energy Development and Access Project, and 
the Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation. 
TANESCO operates a number of isolated mini-grids. In 
March 2015, 18 diesel-fired mini-grids were in operation, 
with a total installed capacity of 82.2 MW. Two of these 
are mini-grids with an installed capacity of 29 MW 
fuelled by natural gas. The remaining mini-grids have 
a total installed of capacity of 53.2 MW and are diesel 
generators (TANESCO, 2015). Rural electricity access in 
Tanzania is estimated to be less than 6%.9
To supply growing on-grid demand, the Ministry of Energy 
and Minerals presented a diversified electricity generation 
mix in its 2014 Electricity Supply Industry Reform report. 
This included natural gas, coal, hydropower and nonconventional renewables. Despite the high renewable 
energy resource potential, which could translate into 
the provision of power at a lower cost, the Electricity 
Supply Industry Reform Roadmap considers only 4.85% 
of renewable energy potential. The generation growth 
envisaged by 2025 is shown in Table 2 below.
9 Value according to the definition of the National 
Electrification Program Prospectus (Innovation Energie 
Développment, 2014).
Source
Existing 
capacity (MW)
(March 2013)
Additional 
capacity (MW)
Total capacity 
by 2025
(MW)
Hydropower 565.8* 1 529 2 095
Oil 456.3 0 456
Natural gas 501 3 968 4 469
Biomass 27 0 27
Coal 0 2,900 2 900
Wind 0 200 200
Solar 0 100 100
Geothermal 0 200 200
Interconnection 14 400 414
Total 1 564.1 9 297 10 861
Table 2: Present and projected installed capacity by year 2025
*Including small hydropower (<10 MW)
Source: Electricity Supply Industry Reform Strategy and Roadmap (MEM, 2014)
Transmission and distribution
The Tanzania transmission network includes the main 
grid, which covers large urban centres, some mini-grids 
in suburbs and rural areas located a long way from the 
central grid, and diesel-powered private generation. 
In addition, TANESCO imports electricity from its 
neighbouring countries at distribution level (AfDB, 2015).
TANESCO owns and operates the transmission and 
distribution systems. However, in some areas, small power 
producers are responsible for isolated mini-grids. By May 
2014, the transmission system consisted of 43 substations 
with 4,867 km of transmission lines comprising 2,732 km 
with system voltages at 220 kV, 1,556 km at 132 kV and 
580 km at 66 kVAlmost all the transmission lines are 
radial single circuit lines. The system is entirely alternating 
current operating at a frequency of 50 Hertz. The total 
installed capacity in the main grid system amounts to 
1,396 MW (TANESCO, 2014).
For the coming decade, the country’s project portfolio 
for interconnectors consists of five projects: 
• a 400 kV interconnector to Kenya in preparatory 
stage 
• a 400 kV interconnector to Zambia with secured 
funding from AfDB and construction already under 
way on the Zambian side
• a planned 220 kV interconnector to Mozambique, 
for which discussions under way with Mozambican 
counterparts • a 63 MW hydropower plant project at the Rusumo 
border with Rwanda and Burundi, which will 
interconnect the national grids of Tanzania, Rwanda 
and Burundi through a 220 kV transmission line 
• a 220 kV transmission line to Malawi by 2021 and a 
340 MW hydropower plant project at the Songwe 
border.
System losses are high at nearly 18%, largely due to 
long distance transmission lines, ageing infrastructure 
and commercial losses. Major investment is required 
to renovate transmission lines and infrastructure in 
different parts of Tanzania.
For the Tanzanian electricity sector, scaling up off-grid 
systems remains a significant challenge (AfDB, 2015). 
This is due to multiple factors, such as the low density 
and sparse distribution of the rural population, as well 
as income poverty. According to the 2012 National 
Census, the average population density in mainland 
Tanzania was 49 inhabitants/km2
. However, the rural 
regions of Lindi, Katavi and Ruvuma have densities of 
13, 15 and 22 inhabitants/km2
 respectively (National 
Bureau of Statistics, 2013). 
The Rural Electrification Investment Prospectus 
shows that approximately 46% of rural populations 
are near the grid; 20% are further away but located 
in densely populated areas, and 34% are further away 
in low density areas. Furthermore, USD 3.5 billion of 
investment is required in the sector to increase the 
rate of rural access from 6.6% to 36.6%, and the rate in 
urban areas from 34.2% to 75.7% by 2022 (Innovation 
Energie Développment, 2014).
Costs and tariffs
Electricity tariff review and approval is in hands of EWURA. 
With the authorisation of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, 
TANESCO submits tariff review requests to EWURA. The 
tariff level is dependent on a number of factors, including 
electricity production cost (including operation cost), social 
cost and other political economic criteria. 
In January 2012, EWURA authorised a 40% tariff 
increase to TANESCO. Nevertheless, TANESCO still 
incurs losses primarily due to its dependency on 
emergency power producers, which account for 13% 
of installed capacity at 205 MW (TANESCO, 2013). 
As far as integrated generation, transmission and 
distribution costs are concerned, TANESCO states in its 
Tariff Review Application Report that the current tariff 
regime yields an average revenue of about 198 TZS/kWh 
(USD 0.10/kWh).10 However, the revenue requirement 
target for TANESCO in 2013 amounted to 332 TZS/kWh 
(0.16 USD/kWh). The shortfall of 134 TZS/kWh (62.5%) 
has severely restricted the ability of the company to 
provide the services required to meet its obligations to 
both its lenders and customers (TANESCO, 2013). 
The present tariff regime differentiates between the 
following customer groups and component costs 
according to basic charge at TZS per calendar month 
(pcm), energy charge (TZS/kWh) and demand charge 
(TZS per kilovolt-amp/kVA pcm) (see Table 3). For 
2015, TANESCO estimates it had 1.85 million customers, 
of which 52% correspond to customer category T1 and 
47% to category D1 (25% consume more than 50 kWh 
pcm and 22% less than 50 kWh pcm). The final 1% of 
customers were in categories T2, T3 and T5.
10 Exchange rate used: USD 1/TZS 2,075 (July 2015).
ograph: ShutterstockCustomer category Component Unit From 1 February 2013
TZS USD*
D1 Domestic low usage – low 
consumption users
Basic charge USD pcm 0 0
Energy charge USD/kWh
50-0 kWh/pcm USD/kWh 60 0.03
> 50 kWh/pcm 273 0.13
T1 General use – for general use of 
electricity including residential, 
small commercial and light 
industrial use, public lighting and 
billboards
Basic charge USD pcm 3 841 1.85
Energy charge USD/kWh 221 0.11
T2 Low voltage maximum demand 
usage, for general use at 400 volts 
with average consumption greater 
than 7500 kWh per meter reading 
period
Basic charge Oil 14 233 6.86
Energy charge Oil 132 0.06
Demand USD/pcm 16 944 8.17
T3 High voltage maximum demand 
usage for general use where power 
is metered at 11/33 kV
Basic charge Oil 14 233 6.86
Energy charge Oil 118 0.06
Demand USD/pcm 14 520 7.00
T5 Bulk supply tariff for Zanzibar
Basic charge Oil 14 233 6.86
Energy charge Oil 106 0.05
Demand USD/pcm 12 079 5.82
Table 3: Electricity tariffs
*Exchange rate used: USD 1/TZS 2,075 (July 2015)
Source: TANESCO, 2013
Although a low social tariff exists for customers using 
less than 50 kWh per month, very few potential 
customers were able to take advantage of this reduced 
tariff due to the high connection fees. In December 
2012, the household connection fees payable upfront 
to TANESCO were substantially decreased to 
approximately USD 68 for a rural customer and USD 120 
for an urban customer (TANESCO, 2013).
The power shortage emergency of 2010 and 2011 
has resulted in a major expansion of costly thermal 
generation. The final report of the Joint Energy Sector 
Review in 2013 states that while electricity provided 
by the company Songas costs USD 0.066/kWh, the 
emergency thermal units (Jet A1 and diesel) cost ranges 
from USD 0.30/kWh to USD 0.43/kWh – a significantly 
higher cost. Consequently, the cumulative cost of 
the emergency power producer from August 2011 to 
December 2012 was estimated at USD 597 million and 
financed through loans guaranteed by government 
from local commercial banks (Larsson et al., 2013).
For the country’s economy, cheaper electricity 
generation sources must be explored and energy 
access efforts intensified in the medium to long term. 
The existing tariff levels will not be able to withstand 
the rise in average costs without driving TANESCO into 
insolvency.
2.4 Renewable energy resources
Tanzania has considerable renewable energy resources, 
including hydropower, solar, wind and biomass 
resources in the form of forests, agricultural residues, 
animal and urban waste. There are also potential 
geothermal resources. Renewable energy resources 
and potentials in Tanzania are provided in the sections 
below. 
With the exception of biomass and hydropower, 
renewable energy sources have only been exploited 
to a limited extent. The spread of renewable energy 
technologies has been limited mainly to promoting improved stoves, improved charcoal production 
techniques, biogas, windmills for water pumping and to 
a lesser extent PV. This has been installed on rooftops, 
providing power solutions to areas not connected to 
the grid and as a backup to intermittent grid power 
supply. PV is also used for telecommunications towers 
and street lighting in some urban areas.
Other renewable energy sources have mainly been 
promoted through private initiatives at various locations 
in Tanzania. Hotels, hospitals and dispensaries have 
attempted to install solar water heaters. Unfortunately, 
many of these units are out of order, mainly due to lack 
of after sales services. Micro-hydropower generation 
has mostly been undertaken by missionaries.
Large hydropower
While Tanzania’s potential hydropower capacity 
is estimated at 4,700 MW, only 561 MW has been 
built (Government of Tanzania, 2014). The largest 
hydropower plants are at the Mtera (80 MW), which has 
a storage capability of more than one year, and Kidatu 
(200 MW) dams on the Great Ruaha River. 
One of the challenges for hydropower development 
in Tanzania is the geographical distance between 
hydropower sites and major demand centres. While the 
former are located mainly in the southwest, the bigger 
and more commercial cities are the major demand 
centres, and these are in the north, northwest and 
east. Tanzania has abundant hydropower resources 
which could play a significant role in its future energy 
development. It could provide an excellent backup 
to other renewables and store large quantities of 
intermittently generated electricity from solar and wind. 
For energy security, it could provide peaking power and 
also generate large amounts of power at least during 
the rainy season.
The Electricity Supply Industry Reform Roadmap targets 
an additional capacity of 1,529 MW to be installed by 
2025 to bring the total to 2,091 MW. Taking into account 
planned capacity additions, large hydropower will still 
represent approximately 20% of the installed capacity 
after 2025, with risks of supply disruptions due to 
recurring droughts. 
Small hydropower
Although assessments show an overall potential of 
480 MW for small hydropower, only 15 MW of small 
hydropower installations are connected to the grid. 
Most of the remaining small hydropower installed in the 
country is owned by private entities. Five sites in the 
300 - 8,000 kW range are owned by TANESCO. More 
than 16 are owned by faith-based groups, 29 with a 
15 - 800 kW capacity range amounting to a total of 2 
MW (AfDB, 2015). 
By 2013, 11 projects had signed small power purchase 
agreement (SPPAs). Of these, four are mini-hydropower 
projects totalling 20.5 MW, biomass projects totalling 
(21.6 MW) and solar projects (2 MW) (MEM, 2013b). 
TANESCO has also signed Letters of Intent for six 
small hydropower projects with a total capacity of 29.9 
MW while small hydropower projects are also being 
developed as isolated mini-grids (see Table 4 below). 
Developer Ministry of Energy 
and Minerals 
Rural Energy Agency, 
Global Village Energy 
Project and World Bank
EU UNIDO*
Sites
Morogoro, Iringa, Njombe, 
Mbeya, Ruvuma, Rukwa, 
Katavi, Kagera
6 hydropower 
mini-grids Yovi
Six mini-grids based 
on mini/microhydropower
Capacity 7.5 MW 1 - 2.3 MW
Table 4: Overview of small hydropower projects in Tanzania
*United Nations Industrial Development Organization
Source: MEM, 2015
Geothermal energy
Tanzania lies within the East African Rift System. Several 
reconnaissance surveys, hot spring and geothermal 
site assessments have been carried out in the country 
since 1949. These studies of geothermal sites included 
measurements of surface temperature, water and gas 
flow as well as analysis of water and gas in the hot 
springs (Mayalla et al., 2011). 
The country established the Tanzania Geothermal 
spearheading domestic geothermal development 
since 2013. Since then, a number of exploration 
studies on geothermal energy are in progress at 
different levels in different geothermal sites. The 
most researched site is Ngozi prospect. This is 
now at the detailed exploration stage, refining the 
geothermal conceptual modal and locating the drilling
targets for exploration wells expected to be drilled
by 2017. Most of the other geothermal prospects in the 
country are at the reconnaissance stageThe early geothermal studies of surface manifestations 
across the country indicated the potential for more than 
5,000 MW in geothermal projects. More than 50 sites 
have been identified so far and are proposed for more 
detailed investigation, mainly from three regions. These 
sites are: 
• the Northern Zone (Kilimanjaro, Arusha and Mara 
region) 
• the Southern Zone (Rukwa and Mbeya region)
The Japan International Cooperation Agency will 
evaluate the resource further by supporting satellite 
imaging and the identification of resources at sites 
with high potential. It will then select from between 
three and five fields for further in-depth investigation. 
Pre-feasibility studies based on conceptual models 
of the field will be carried out, along with suitability 
• the eastern coastal belt, which is associated with 
rifting and magmatic intrusion (the Rufiji Basin) and 
the Luhoi Spring site, with potential for 50 - 100 MW.
Tanzania does not have any geothermal power 
generation facilities, and there is no commercial usage 
of geothermal water. However, there is potential to 
harvest the resource for domestic to industrial heating 
once it is brought to the surface (Mnjokava, 2014).
Figure 9a: Location of geothermal prospects in Tanzania 
Source: Tanzania Geothermal Development Company (2015)
Northern
Volcanic
Region
Rungwe
Volcanic
Region
assessments based on project economics and 
environmental and social factors. An exploratory welldrilling programme will be prepared for promising sites, 
and test well drilling will take place with the support 
of the Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program of the 
World Bank. Resource confirmation will be followed by 
feasibility studies (AfDB, 2015).Figure 9b: Tanzania
s geothermal resources 
Figure 10: Wind map of Tanzania
Source: Tanzania Geothermal Development Company (2015)
Geothermal Prospects Estimated 
potential 
(MW)
Northern Volcanic region: 1,000
Lake Natron, Manyara, Eyasi, Mt. 
Meru, Ngorongoro in Arusha - 
Kilimanjaro region 
Mtagata - Kagera, Iringa, Tanga >1,000
(Amboni), Kigoma, Maji Moto in 
Kavati region, Rock of Hades in 
Rukwa; and Ushirombo in Geita 
region:
Central Zone: 500
Dodoma, Singida and Shinyanga
800 Nyasa - Mbeya - Rukwa Zone
Kisaki in Morogoro region 600
Luhoi, Utete in Coast region 600
Maji Moto in Mara region 500
Mt. Meru
Natron
Luhoi
Kisaki
Ngozi
Wind Speed at 50m m/s
Tanzania 2km 2005 - 2015 WBG
3 -3.23 m/s
3.23 - 3.47 m/s
3.47 - 3.7 m/s
3.7 - 3.93 m/s
3.93 - 4.17 m/s
4.17 - 4.4 m/s
4.4 - 4.63 m/s
4.63 - 4.87 m/s
4.87 - 5.1 m/s
5.1 - 5.33 m/s
5.33 - 5.57 m/s
5.57 - 5.8 m/s
5.8 - 6.03 m/s
6.03 - 6.27 m/s
6.27 - 6.5 m/s
6.5 - 6.73 m/s
6.73 - 6.97 m/s
6.97 - 7.2 m/s
7.2 - 7.43 m/s
7.43 - 7.67 m/s
7.67 - 7.9 m/s
7.9 - 8.13 m/s
8.13 - 8.37 m/s
8.37 - 8.6 m/s
8.6 -8.83 m/s
8.83 - 9.07 m/s
9.07 - 9.3 m/s
9.3 - 9.53 m/s
9.53 - 9.77 m/s
9.77 - 10 m/s
Wind
Tanzania is blessed with strong wind resources, which 
attain speeds of between six and eight metres per 
second (m/s), particularly in escarpment areas around 
the Rift Valley and along the coastal areas (see Figure 
10 and Figure 11).Several studies have been in progress for a number of 
years, including an investigation programme sponsored 
by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals, TANESCO and 
TaTEDO with technical and financial support from the 
Denmark National Laboratory (RISØ), and the Danish 
International Development Agency (DANIDA). These 
TANESCO and the Ministry of Energy and Minerals are 
leading wind resource assessments in Mkumbara, Karatu, 
Gomvu, Litembe, Makambako, Mgagao and Kititimo, 
while the Rural Energy Agency is supporting wind 
measurements on Mafia Island. Wind measurements at 
30 m are available from TANESCO for the three sites of 
Makambako, Mwanga and Singida. Singida is where the 
country’s first ever large-scale wind power plant is being 
built, with a capacity of 100 MW. When the study report 
was issued in 2005, measurements had been taken for 
the high wind season. The results showed average wind 
speeds of 10-11 m/s, thus confirming the previous results 
from the DANIDA project. 
The latest resource assessment initiatives include the 
preliminary findings from the World Bank Energy Sector 
Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) renewable 
energy resource mapping project. The initial results were 
based on global datasets and satellite analysis and show 
high wind power potential over more than 10% of the 
organisations have made major efforts to assess wind 
resources and undertake investment feasibility for 
harnessing wind energy. This investigation ended 
in 2003 (DANIDA/IS, 2003) and presented specific 
locations for which it produced detailed information. 
This is described in the table below.
Table 5: Wind resources in Tanzania
Source: German Technical Cooperation Agency (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit), 2009b
Site Study 10 m wind speed 
(m/s)
30 m wind speed 
(m/s)
Makambako Original Wind East 
Africa 7.6 8.7
Singida Wind East Africa 8.2 9.4
Karatu (Arusha) DANIDA/Risø/
TANESCO 4.9 5.5
Mkumbara (Tanga) DANIDA/Risø/
TANESCO 4.14 4.9
Gomvu (Kigamboni) DANIDA/Risø/
TANESCO 3.56 4.28
Litembe (Mtwara) DANIDA/Risø/
TANESCO 3.21 4.47
country. This is an area comparable to the size of Malawi 
(World Bank, 2015b). 
Moreover, the International Renewable Energy Agency 
(IRENA) and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory 
(LBNL) have developed a methodology for renewable 
power development within the Africa Clean Energy 
Corridor, an initiative in which Tanzania is a participant. 
The approach combines geospatial, statistical, energy 
engineering and economic methods to comprehensively 
identify and value high quality wind zones for grid 
integration based on technoeconomic criteria, generation 
profiles, and socioenvironmental impacts. 
Geo-referenced PDF maps are one of the key outputs of 
that study, embedding both the visual content as well 
as the attribute values of each zone. A snapshot of the 
interactive map is presented in Figure 11 below for wind 
zones and shows the highest potential and most costeffective zones for Tanzania. Figure 11: Wind energy zones in Tanzania
Figure 12: Global solar irradiation in Tanzania
Source: IRENA-LBNL (2015); for more on IRENA-LBNL zoning study: mapre.lbl.gov
Potential photvoltaic electricity
production kWh/kWp World 
1km 1994/1996/2006-2015
1.9 - 2.14 kWh/kWp
2.14 - 2.36 kWh/kWp
2.38 - 2.63 kWh/kWp
2.63 - 2.87 kWh/kWp
2.87 - 3.11 kWh/kWp
3.11 - 3.35 kWh/kWp
3.35 - 3.59 kWh/kWp
3.59 - 3.83 kWh/kWp
3.83 - 4.08 kWh/kWp
4.08 - 4.32 kWh/kWp
4.32 - 4.56 kWh/kWp
4.56 - 4.8 kWh/kWp
4.8 - 5.04 kWh/kWp
5.04 - 5.28 kWh/kWp
5.28 - 5.53 kWh/kWp
5.53 - 5.77 kWh/kWp
5.77 - 6.01 kWh/kWp
6.01 - 6.25 kWh/kWp
6.25 - 6.49 kWh/kWp
6.49 - 6.73 kWh/kWp
6.73 - 6.98 kWh/kWp
6.98 - 7.22 kWh/kWp
7.22 - 7.45 kWh/kWp
7.46 - 7.7 kWh/kWp
Solar
Tanzania’s annual solar resources exceed 5 kWh/m2 
per day throughout the country. Insolation is generally 
higher and more consistent in the Lake Victoria basin 
and along the coast. However, in the elevated areas 
around Moshi and Arusha, and in Iringa and further 
south, insolation is considerably reduced (i.e. less than 
4 kWh/m2
 per day) during the cloudy season. This is 
between May and August (see Figure 12). The preliminary results from the renewable mapping 
project carried out by the World Bank Energy Sector 
Management Assistance Program, as well as the IRENALBNL study, both show that Tanzania has a good store 
of solar resources (Figures 13 and 14).
Figure 13: Concentrated solar power zones in Tanzania
Figure 14: Solar PV zones in Tanzania
Source: IRENA-LBNL (2015); for more on IRENA-LBNL zoning study: mapre.lbl.govTanzania’s PV consumer market started evolving in the 
early 2000s due to the capacity developed by NGOs and 
the formation of the Tanzania Solar Energy Association, 
which is now called TAREA. The private market has 
evolved from an installed capacity of 300 kilowattpeak in the late 1990s to just over 5 MW in small-scale 
installations in 2012 (Hansen, Pedersen and Nygaard, 
2014). During this development, annual sales grew 
from 70 kilowatt-peak in 2002 to 2 MW in 2011. They 
are thought to have been higher in 2012 and 2013 due 
to favourable policy developments, support schemes 
and the rapid reduction of costs for solar PV in offgrid locations.11 The increased sales in off-grid markets 
are also a result of increased consumer awareness and 
buying power. Equally, sales have been influenced by 
the government’s recognition of the potential role of 
solar PV in the electrification of large economically 
active parts of the country. The grid would otherwise 
take a much longer time to reach these areas. 
Solar home systems and small-scale commercial 
systems amount to around 75% of installed PV capacity 
in Tanzania and therefore contribute the most to the 
country’s solar market (Ondraczek, 2013). By the 
end of 2008, 40,000 solar home systems had been 
installed, and their annual sales amounted to 4,000 
- 8,000 (Hansen, Pedersen and Nygaard, 2014). The 
remaining 25% of installed PV capacity mainly consists 
of PV systems in schools, health centres, missions 
and government offices, and to a minor extent in the 
telecommunications and tourism sectors (Hansen, 
Pedersen and Nygaard, 2014). There is some application 
of solar PV electricity for productive use. Examples 
include pineapple processing by Matunda Mema (T) 
(in Karagwe District), gold processing by New Luika 
Mines (in Mbeya District) and Geita Gold Mine (in Geita 
District), and timber machining by Sao Saw Mill.
There are currently no grid-connected PV generation 
plants in Tanzania. However, grid-connected solar PV 
is increasingly viewed as a promising replacement 
for thermal power generation in remote mini-grids. 
Nevertheless, no large investments have taken place 
yet. There is growing interest in small and large 
projects involving connection to the main grid but 
these discussions are still only at a preliminary stage 
(Deutsche Auslandshandelskammer, 2013).
Biomass
Biomass energy is major renewable energy resource 
used in a traditional way by almost all households, 
institutions and small and medium-sized enterprises 
in Tanzania. Biomass energy is mostly used for heat 
production and as fuel for cooking in Tanzania. Figures 
on dependence on woodfuel for cooking range from 
more than 73% to 90% (World Health Organization, 
Global Environment Facility and United Nations 
Development Programme, 2009). More than 90% 
of biomass demand is for household consumption 
(firewood, charcoal, crop residues). The rest of biomass 
demand is for commercial, institutional and industrial 
sectors (10%). Annual consumption of charcoal in 
Tanzania stands at one million tonnes per year and is 
growing fast, contributing to more than nine million 
tonnes of CO2 and depletion of more than 300 hectares 
of natural forest per day. Change of land use and 
deforestation also accounts for 58% of the country’s 
total greenhouse gas emissions. Growing demand is 
driven by rapid urbanisation and high relative prices 
or scarcity of energy substitutes, particularly kerosene, 
electricity, biogas, biomass briquettes and liquefied 
petroleum gas. The Biomass Energy Strategy report 
baseline projections show that without supply-side and 
demand-side interventions, demand for charcoal will 
double by 2030 from approximately 2.3 million tonnes 
in 2012 (CAMCO Clean Energy, 2014). 
The initiatives supporting increased access to clean 
cookstoves or fuels have been scattered. They were 
launched in the 1980s by the Ministry of Energy and 
Minerals and carried out by TaTEDO, which has been 
playing a leadership role and supporting the coordination and sustainability of efforts. Since much higher 
total energy consumption is expected in future, reducing 
total firewood and charcoal use by improving cookstoves 
would have a positive impact on deforestation. 
11 The mini-grid market segment in Tanzania is also limited,
and little is known about it. No agency currently keeps 
track of the deployment of specific PV systems.
ograph: ShutterstockFigure 15: Woodfuel resource density in Tanzania in tonnes per hectare 
Source: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2010)
Woody biomass t/ha
0.1 - 5
6 - 10
11 - 20
21 - 50
51 - 100
101 - 200
201 - 300
301 - 400
401 - 700
Kilometers
0 145 290 580
Commercial biomass energy12 is a major energy and 
income revenue source for rural and urban livelihoods. 
Charcoal and commercial woodfuel (firewood) 
amounted to approximately USD 1 billion in revenues 
for a large portion of the rural and urban producers, 
transporters and wood energy sellers in 2012. 
Commercial biomass energy is the largest source of 
revenue in rural areas (CAMCO Clean Energy, 2014).
Biogas was introduced by the Small Industries 
Development Organization in 1975, with a number of 
other NGOs promoting use of the technology. However, 
the Centre for Agricultural Mechanization and Rural 
Technology, later in co-operation with the German 
Cooperation, accelerated awareness and technology 
dissemination, especially in northern Tanzania. The 
Tanzania Domestic Biogas Programme started in 2009, 
and its first phase finished in 2013 with the installation 
of 8,799 biogas plants. The second phase started in 
2014 and will end in 2017. The two phases are aiming 
to erect 20,700 plants altogether. The programme is 
hosted in the Centre for Agricultural Mechanization 
and Rural Technology and receives technical assistance 
from SNV Netherlands Development Organisation. It 
is part of the Africa Biogas Partnership Programme 
managed by Hivos with funding from the Netherlands 
Directorate for Development Cooperation (Directoraatgeneraal Internationale Samenwerking).
With more than 17,000 hectares of sugarcane 
plantations along with forest and agricultural residues, 
there is estimated co-generation potential of more than
country’s power generation. Energy generation 
potential from excess bagasse in sugar mills is about 
99 GWh per year – 3% of national electricity generation 
MEM, 2013b). Two private companies currently supply 
TANESCO with biomass generation: Tanganyika 
Planting Company (a major sugar producer) supplies 
3 MW while Tanzania Wattle Company (a tannin 
producer) has an SPPA for 1.5 MW. 
Driven by high oil prices, energy security concerns and 
global climate change, demand for biofuels has been 
increasing and has found its way onto the agricultural 
development, energy policy and natural resource 
management agendas. The Government of Tanzania 
made its interest in biofuel developments explicit in 
2005 at the time of a GIZ study on liquid biofuel for 
transportation in Tanzania. This reviewed the potential 
of the biofuel subsector in the country and the 
importance of developing biofuels, with an emphasis on 
biodiesel and bioethanol. The study proposed a biofuel 
development institutional structure. It suggested that 
the Ministry of Energy and Minerals could facilitate 
the formation of the National Biofuel Task Force, 
National Biofuel User Association and the Biofuel 
Policy. Different stakeholders were engaged in liquid 
biofuel development, including the sector-oriented 
ministries, civil society organisations, the private sector, 
multinational companies and individuals. Some of the 
initiatives established were biofuel rural electrification 
and biofuel outgrower schemes.
12 Thtil biftbiRenewables, including off-grid
solutions, can help meet rising 
urban energy needsSolar PV off the main grid3. ENABLING 
ENVIRONMENT
FOR RENEWABLE 
ENERGY
3.1 Key energy stakeholders and institutional set-up
The energy sector in Tanzania comprises governmental institutions, private 
sector operators, NGOs and a parastatal and vertically integrated power 
utility, TANESCO.
Government/public sector institutions
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals: this has the overarching role of overseeing 
policies, strategies and laws within the areas of energy and mineral 
resource management. The ministry’s stated vision is to be “an effective 
institution contributing significantly to the acceleration of socioeconomic 
development through sustainable development and utilisation of energy 
and mineral resources in Tanzania by 2025”. Its tasks also include planning, 
capacity development and financial resource mobilisation.
• Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited (TANESCO): this is a 
parastatal institution within the Ministry of Energy and Minerals and is 
in charge of power generation, transmission and distribution. It is the 
main power utility company in the country and provides about 60% of 
the effective generating capacity of the national grid. It supplies power 
directly to mainland Tanzania and to Zanzibar Electricity Corporation. 
Its mission is to generate, transmit and supply electricity in the most 
effective, competitive and sustainable manner possible. 
• Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority (EWURA): this is an 
autonomous regulatory body set up in 2006 that oversees the technical 
and economic regulation of the energy and water sectors. Its tasks consist 
of regulating power retail tariffs, awarding licences and monitoring and 
enforcement activities. 
• Rural Energy Agency: this was founded in 2005 as part of the Rural 
Energy Act to support the Government of Tanzania’s endeavours to 
accelerate access to rural areas. It is an autonomous body under the 
Ministry of Energy and Minerals and its task is to deal with rural access by 
co-financing rural electrification programmes implemented by relevant 
actors.
• Tanzania Investment Centre: this had the mandate of becoming “the 
primary agency of the government to co-ordinate, encourage, promote, 
and facilitate investment in Tanzania”. Although not mandatory, the 
centre is promoted as a one-stop shop for new local and foreign investors 
because of the incentives offered to projects it approves.
• Tanzania Geothermal Development Company: this is a subsidiary 
company of TANESCO and became operational in July 2014 with a 
mandate to be at the forefront of geothermal development in Tanzaniaconcerned with enabling and supportive policies 
and regulations that would accelerate geothermal 
development in the country. The company is keen 
to develop the country’s geothermal roadmap and 
development plan.
Private sector institutions
• Emergency power producers and IPPs: these are 
private investors owning power plants of more 
than 10 MW and contributing 40% of the installed 
electricity capacity. Current players include Songas, 
Independent Power Tanzania Limited (IPTL), 
Symbion Arusha, Aggreko and Symbion Dodoma. 
All these companies have thermal stations that 
operate with diesel, gas or heavy fuel oil.
• Small power producers: these are private 
companies operating small renewables-based 
power projects (up to 10 MW) under an SPPA to sell 
power to TANESCO or directly to customers. Many 
of the small power producers also operate in other 
business areas such as tea and sugar. The small 
power producers include Mwenga Hydropower, 
Mufindi Paper Mills, TANWATT, Texpol Company, 
Ngombezi (Mafia) etc. 
• Private solar energy companies: most of these 
companies are organised under the Tanzania 
Renewable Energy Association but work 
independently in solar PV installation, importing 
and selling solar PV products. These companies 
include ENSOL, Sustainable Energy Services 
Company (SESCOM), Ashton Energy, Zara Solar, 
Alternative Energy, Step Solar, Solar Sisters, Resco, 
Davis and Shirtliff, Rex Energy, Baraka Solar, Anchor 
Power, Photons Energy etc.
• Private biomass energy companies: these are 
companies engaged in the fabrication and supply of 
improved and clean woodfuel cookstoves. Among 
these companies are the Sustainable Energy and 
Enterprise Company, ARTI Energy, Husk Power 
Systems, INVOTECH, Green Resources, Sugar 
Companies (Illovo-Kilombero, Tanzania Plantation 
Company, Mtibwa and Kagera), Centre for 
Agricultural Mechanisation and Rural Technology, 
Tanganyika Wattle Company (TANWAT), Sao Hill 
Sawmill Industries/Green Resources, East African 
Briquette Company, Tanga, Kilimanjaro Industrial 
Development Corporation, Mena Wood Briquetting, 
SIMGAS, Katani, Biomass Energy Tanzania etc.
Academic and research institutions 
• Capacity-building for people working in the 
energy sector is offered at various universities and 
research and training institutions in Tanzania. These 
institutions include Arusha Technical College, Dar 
es Salaam Institute of TechnologyMbeya Institute 
Salaam, University of Dodoma and organisations 
within the Vocational Education Training Authority 
(Mafinga Lutheran Vocational Training Centre, 
Legeruki Lutheran Vocational Centre, Hai Vocational 
Training Centre, Mobisol Academy and M-Power 
Academy).
• Research and development efforts to stimulate 
energy innovation are important pillars of 
development in the energy sector. Although the 
energy policy stipulates a requirement for research, 
the country does not have specific institution for 
energy research. Research studies are conducted 
by consultancies commissioned by different 
stakeholders, such as the Economic and Social 
Research Foundation, Costech, Geological Survey 
of Tanzania, Nishanti Associates, Research on 
Poverty Alleviation, TaTEDO, Institute of Resource 
Assessment, Sokoine University of Agriculture etc.
Most of the research studies cover policy development 
and also the production and use of renewable energy 
such as bioethanol as a fuel for domestic and industrial 
uses. Equally, they deal with the renewable energy fuel 
value chain, liquid biofuel feedstock production etc.
Civil society organisations 
Civil society organisations in the renewable energy 
sector include NGOs, faith-based organisations and 
renewable energy networks. Various NGOs and faithbased organisations promote access to sustainable 
and renewable energy. The faith-based organisations 
include missionaries who installed mini-grids as far 
back as 1928. Up until now, many mini-hydropower 
plants have been owned, operated and managed by 
faith-based organisations. The two main networks 
in Tanzania are the Tanzania Renewable Energy 
Association and the National Gender and Sustainable 
Energy Networks. TaTEDO is a national NGO that 
has been advocating sustainable energy access for 
over two decades. Other NGOs include AMKA Trust, 
CARE-Tanzania, Clean Cookstoves and Fuel Alliance 
of Tanzania, Tanzania Forest Conservation Group, SNV 
Netherlands Development Organisation (Tanzania), 
Voluntary Service Overseas (Tanzania), NORGES VEL, 
Tanzania Renewable Energy Incubator, Energy Lab, 
Same/Mwanga Environmental Conservation Advisory 
Organization and WWF (Tanzania). 
Local government authorities 
Local government authorities in Tanzania have 
experience of off-grid production and distribution 
of energy in their own (mostly urban) areas using 
decentralised energy systems and mini-grids. For 
instance, the local government authority in Mbarari, 
Mbeya used small hydropower to supply electricity 
to Mbarali Township. Few district councils generate 
electricity using thermal generators. Most largely rely power in their urban areas. By the end of November 
2014, only 12 district headquarters had not yet been 
electrified, namely Bukombe, Kasulu, Kilinda, Kilolo, 
Ludewa, Namanyere, Namtumbo Ngara, Ngorongoro, 
Serengeti, Ukerewe, and Utete. Around 30 MW of 
thermal generation is in isolated off-grid areas. There 
is a need for intensive strategies to expand energy 
generation to different sources by local government 
authorities.
3.2 Energy policies and regulatory 
framework
Tanzania formulated the first version of the National 
Energy Policy in 1992, which was subsequently 
revised in 2003. This spearheaded development in 
the energy sector by aiming to align itself with crosscutting macroeconomic objectives and by promoting 
the involvement of the private sector in energy. The 
implementation of the National Energy Policy yielded 
the enactment of the Rural Energy Act 2005 leading 
to the foundation of the Rural Energy Agency and the 
Rural Energy Fund in 2007. This had been preceded 
by the establishment of EWURA in 2006 as well as 
the Electricity Act 2008, the Petroleum Act 2008 and 
the adoption of the Standardised Power Purchase 
Agreement and Tariffs, also in 2008. The National 
Energy Policy document was again revised in 2015 
and included more aggressive approaches to easing 
the entry of the private sector and alternative energy 
technologies (MEM, 2015). The renewable energy 
sector in Tanzania is guided by a number of polices 
and legislation shown in Table 6. These are divided into 
general guidelines; electricity sector; renewable energy 
sector; tariffs and strategies.
General Status Description of policy/strategy
National Energy 
Policy 2015
In place
Published in 2015
By ensuring an efficient and sustainable energy value chain 
which includes production, procurement, transportation, 
distribution and end-use systems, the National Energy Policy 
aims to ensure the provision of reliable and affordable energy 
in Tanzania.
Electricity Supply 
Industry Reform 
Strategy and 
Roadmap 
2014 - 2025
Published on 30 June 2014
The Electricity Supply Industry Reform Strategy and Roadmap 
aims for more efficiency as well as an improvement of the 
quality of services and goods delivered to customers, a sound 
business environment and the growth of the power sector to 
allow the country to meet its development targets.
National 
Public Private 
Partnership 
Implementation 
Strategy
To be covered in Electricity 
Supply Industry Reform 
Strategy and Roadmap
This strategy provides an important instrument for attracting 
investments and effectively resolving managerial, financial 
and maintenance issues related to public goods and services. 
The implementation of the strategy will enable the 
Government of Tanzania to efficiently deliver socioeconomic 
goods and services.
Ministry of Energy 
and Minerals 
Three-Year 
Strategic Plan
In place (2011/12–2015/16)
Published November 2012
This plan provides strategic direction, guiding the 
implementation of the ministry’s plan and budget. 
National 
Investment 
Promotion Policy
1996 Encourages investment in all feasible sources, with a focus on 
domestic resources.
Electricity sector
Electricity Act 
2016 Draft This act, which is being drafted, includes more options for renewables.
Electricity Act 
2008 In effect
This act provides for the facilitation and regulation of 
generation, transmission, transformation, distribution, supply 
and use of electric energy as well as cross-border trade in 
electricity and rural electrification planning and regulation.
Table 6: Policies and legislation which affect the renewable energy sectorElectricity sector
Rural Energy Act 
2005 In effect This act facilitates the establishment of the Rural Energy Board, the Rural Energy Fund and Rural Energy Agency.
Power System 
Master Plan
In effect; the 2012 update was 
issued in May 2013
The overall objective of the plan is to reassess short-term 
(2013 - 2017), mid-term (2018 - 2023) and long-term (2024 
- 2035), generation, transmission plan requirements as well 
as the need to connect currently off-grid regions, options for 
power exchanges with Ethiopia (through Kenya), Zambia, 
Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Mozambique, and increased 
supply of reliable power. 
Rural Energy 
Strategy
Draft Rural Energy Prospectus 
ready
The strategy intends to provide direction for bridging the 
energy access gap in rural parts of Tanzania.
Rural 
Electrification 
Master Plan
Due to follow the Rural Energy 
Strategy
The Rural Energy Master Plan aims to promote decentralised 
power generation from renewable sources in rural 
electrification efforts. 
 Renewable energy sector
Environmental 
Management Act 
2004 
In effect
This comprehensive piece of legislation represents the main 
legal and institutional framework governing sustainable 
environmental management in Tanzania. It includes incentives 
as well as mechanisms to ensure adequate environment 
management at all levels of governance in a way that 
includes villages and districts in the national environmental 
management framework.
Biofuels Policy Draft policy under approval
This document provide direction for developing liquid biofuels 
in Tanzania by giving proper guidelines to stakeholders 
interested in investing in liquid biofuels in the country.
Biomass Energy 
Strategy Draft strategy under approval
With the objective of ensuring the implementation of an 
enabling institutional framework, this strategy aims to uncover 
sustainable supply pathways for biomass energy while at the 
same time addressing energy access and energy efficiency in 
the biomass energy subsector.
Tariffs
Energy and 
Water Utilities 
Regulatory 
Authority Act 
2001 
In effect
This act aims to set up a central regulatory authority for 
water and energy utilities, which was concretised by the 
establishment of EWURA in 2006.
Feed-in tariff 
policy
Consultancy final report on 
Renewable Energy Feedin Tariff (REFIT) submitted 
to EWURA and waiting for 
endorsement before policy 
preparation
The policy expects to promote a multi-player renewablesbased power generation market by establishing a fixed tariff 
for a certain period. The policy was launched to provide 
security and confidence to investors in renewables-based 
power generation.
Small Power 
Producers 
Framework
2nd Generation framework in 
application since April 2015 
This framework aims to stimulate the increased involvement 
of private actors in the development of small renewable 
energy installations (less than 10 MW) in Tanzania. To reach 
that objective, the framework clarifies tariffs and outlines 
incentives and tools to mitigate the risks often encountered 
during small-scale projects. 
Table 6: Policies and legislation which affect the renewable energy sector - CONTINUED3.3 Financing and investment
Foreign direct investment is critical to energy 
infrastructure, especially in developing countries such 
as Tanzania. In 2013, Tanzania received the highest total 
foreign direct investment in the East African Community, 
amounting to USD 1.87 billion. This was primarily due 
to the gas and mineral sectors. The total injected 
into the East African Community region amounted to
USD 6.2 billion (United Nations Conference on Trade 
and Development, 2014).
Between 1997 and 2014, Tanzania accommodated 12 
projects funded by foreign direct investment in the energy 
sector – 11 in electricity and one in natural gas. The total 
sum invested amounted to USD 960 million, of which
USD 644 million was directed at electricity (World Bank, 
2016). This was exclusively aimed at IPPs and emergency 
power producers using thermal generation (principally 
through natural gas). New foreign direct investment 
directed at the renewable energy sector is accounted for 
in the Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program and in the 
Electricity Supply Industry Reform Roadmap. 
Within the same framework for attracting more private 
involvement in the power sector, a feed-in tariff scheme 
was put in place in 2008 for small power producers 
(100 kW to 10 MW) in Tanzania. SPPAs for small power 
projects were approved in 2009 for mini-hydropower, 
biomass, solar PV and wind. Flaws have been observed 
in the implementation of the SPPAs, namely the 
unattractive tariffs based on avoided costs; the payment 
of small power producer tariffs in local currency; and 
the relatively short term of the SPPA (15 years). This 
made it rather difficult for the local private sector to 
make use of SPPAs and did not significantly increase 
the penetration of renewable energy technologies. 
Under the first generation SPPA, EWURA only approved
40.1 MW of SPPAs with biomass (15.6 MW), solar
(2 MW) and hydropower plants (22.5 MW). A second 
generation SPPA was therefore approved in 2015. It 
provides for a fixed tariff in US dollars for the duration 
of the SPPA (up to 25 years) by size for hydropower and 
biomass regardless of the location, instead of annual 
tariffs in local currency. For solar and wind, the tariffs 
will be defined through competitive bidding to allow 
the users to benefit from technology cost reduction. 
In addition, the Rural Energy Agency provides grants 
for qualified project developers through the Rural 
Energy Fund, Resourced through governmental annual 
budgetary allocation, contribution from international 
partners, levies on the sale of electricity by the national 
utility, and also through Special Purpose Funds for rural 
energy by development partners, the Rural Energy 
Fund provides money in the following forms:
• grants towards the capital costs of projects
• capacity-building activities in relation to planning 
and project preparation
• financial assistance e.g. for co-financing investment 
in innovative projects related to the objects of 
Special Purpose Funds created by development 
partners.
Meanwhile, the Tanzania Investment Centre offers 
certificates for incentives and investment guarantees, 
and registers technology agreements for investments 
worth more than USD 300,000 (foreign investors) and 
USD 100,000 (local investors). It also assists in the 
removal of bottlenecks to establishing and running 
businesses by bringing together relevant government 
agencies in a one-stop shop. Energy is among the 
priority investment areas for which, among other 
incentives, the following are offered to encourage 
investment:
• import duty exemption on various goods, including 
wind generators, solar PV and thermal equipment
• zero duty on imported raw materials for the local 
production of deep cycle batteries and solar PV 
equipment 
• zero rated value-added tax on exports.
Moreover, the Tanzania Investment Act 1997 provides 
the following incentives to all holders of certificates of 
incentives: 
• 0% duty and value-added tax relief on all capital 
goods
• 30% corporate tax (25% for listing company on the 
stock exchange)
• 10% withholding tax on dividends
• 10% withholding tax on interest.
Moreover, with the support of international partners, 
Tanzania’s financial system actors are increasingly 
considering opportunities to provide financing for 
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects. Rural 
and urban entrepreneurs with a courageous spirit can 
approach these macro- and microfinancial institutions, 
and obtain finance for launching and developing 
renewable energy projects.Solar PV off the main grid4. EMERGING 
ISSUES AFFECTING 
RENEWABLE ENERGY
DEPLOYMENT 
Challenges and opportunities for the renewables sector in Tanzania are explored 
in this section. The development of the renewable energy market is largely 
subject to the country’s natural resource assets and corresponding technologies 
which convert energy sources into services. This section is thus divided into 
subsections covering different resources, policy and regulatory frameworks, 
private sector involvement, and human capacities and skills for developing the 
existing renewable energy resources. In each subsection, the status of each 
particular subsector is reviewed followed by matters that need to be resolved.
4.1 Resource assessment and planning
Although Tanzania’s potential renewable energy resource is considerable, the 
Electricity Industry Reform Roadmap takes into account less than 5% of the 
non-hydropower renewables that could be connected to the grid. This rather 
low target could be attributed to a number of factors. One important factor 
is a general lack of information on the technical and economic potential 
of different renewable energy resources in the country. This has led to 
inadequate target-setting and planning, and decisions biased towards more 
conventional generation sources, such as coal, gas and large hydropower, in 
which the country has solid experience. 
As indicated in Section 2.4, a number of country assessments of the renewable 
energy resource have been carried out. However, in many cases this data 
lacked further analysis to determine the technoeconomic potential of power 
generation from these sources. For example, available resource information 
for geothermal power generation is limited to preliminary studies of surface 
temperature, water and gas sampling and analysis of hot springs which date 
back to the 1950s. For power generation from biomass, there is no estimation 
of the potential attributed to different crops. Until recently, wind speed data 
were only available for a small number of stations at heights of under 10 m. 
Yet data for heights of 50 - 100 m are required for large-scale wind energy 
applications. For solar, no estimates have been taken on the potential for 
PV or concentrated solar power (CSP) power generation, nor how much is 
technically or economically feasible.
To enable policy makers, project developers and other interest groups to 
make balanced decisions on large-scale renewable energy development, 
further analysis of these resource assessments is required. This needs to 
evaluate the quality of renewable resources from a technical and economical 
point of view. In addition, other criteria should also be considered. These 
include, for example, grid operability (temporal correlation between 
electricity generation and system demand at a particular site), transmission 
and road infrastructure cost, proximity or overlap with environmentally 
sensitive areas, and population density. 
Photograph: E.ON Off Grid Solutions — Rafiki PowerAccording to the zoning methodology in the IRENALBNL study (IRENA and LBNL, 2015), the estimated 
installed capacity potential for PV, CSP and wind 
technologies in Tanzania is considerable. This is shown 
in Table 7. The minimal ambition reflected in the 
country’s energy targets is not justified given the level 
of potential shown in estimates of installed wind and 
solar capacity. The Electricity Industry Reform Roadmap 
plans for 200 MW of wind and 100 MW of solar PV. 
The zoning study found that the capacity values of the 
wind zones identified are very high, which indicates 
Furthermore, agricultural land was found to comprise 
about half the wind resource area in Tanzania, implying 
that land leasing policies could be of importance to 
high potential and cost-effective wind development. 
Given that the direct land footprint of a wind turbine 
is relatively low compared to the entire area of a wind 
farm (Denholm et al., 2009), dual use of the land for 
farming and wind generation is preferable from a land 
use efficiency point of view.13
Stakeholders are not always aware of all the resource 
assessment studies being undertaken or how best 
to use these. Furthermore, the absence of a central 
repository unit which stores, analyses and advocates 
the validation of resource assessments means there 
that the wind generation profiles could contribute 
significantly to meeting the country’s peak demand. It 
could thereby contribute to system reliability due to its 
higher correlation with system demand. Approximately 
20% of the total installed capacity is emergency oilbased generation at around USD 0.30/kWh. Due to its 
high capacity value, wind generation has the potential 
to displace much of this oil-based emergency power 
and to do so at a third of the cost as the levelised 
cost of energy (LCOE) for wind lies in the range of
USD 0.065-10/kWh (see Table 8).
is a lack of awareness, difficult access and ultimately 
low use of available information. During the RRA 
consultation process, stakeholders expressed the need 
to establish a designated unit in Tanzania which will 
contain all relevant statistics and resource information 
on renewables.
Wind Solar PV Solar CSP
Resource quality 
(w/m2) 200 250 300 350 400 230 240 250 260 270 260 270 280 290 300
Installed capacity 
potential (MW) 46 900 20 800 9 390 4 570 1 900 59 000 59 000 58 400 50 700 47 200 26 100 21 600 10 500 4 140 5 000
Planned capacity 200 100 0
Technology LCOE range (USD/kWh)
Wind 0.065 – 10.0
CSP 0.214 – 0.22
Solar PV 0.118 – 0.14
Table 7: Estimated installed capacity potential (MW) for wind, solar PV and solar CSP at various thresholds 
of resource quality
Table 8: LCOE ranges of renewable energy zones
Analysis from IRENA-LBNL zoning study (2015)
Analysis from IRENA-LBNL zoning study (2015)
13 In an actual sense, land can be leased, but only to local 
users. Whenever land is leased to a foreign entity, the local
or central government has to be involved through the 
Ministry of Lands. If the area required by an investor is 
below 50 hectares, it can be leased by the village
government. Land of more than 50 hectares needs a permit 
from the local or central government land office (through 
the Ministry of Lands). The land ownership in this case 
should be changed from village to general land and then 
leased to the investor.4.2 Planning
IRENA has devised a power sector investment planning 
tool for southern African countries. Known as the 
System Planning Test (SPLAT-S) model, it covers 
the investment period to 2050. This is a least-cost 
optimisation model, which enables analysts to assess 
investment paths to achieve different policy goals. 
For the purpose of the Tanzania RRA, the scenario was 
updated to reflect the latest renewable energy cost 
trends. Moreover, the renewable energy zones identified 
through the zoning methodology in the IRENA-LBNL 
Study (IRENA and LBNL, 2015) have been explicitly 
incorporated in the SPLAT-S model for Tanzania. 
The assessment presented here is based on certain 
assumptions, including fuel costs, infrastructure 
development and policy developments, which were 
taken from the assumptions primarily in the SAPP 
According to the Power Sector Master Plan,14 electricity 
demand in Tanzania is projected to rise from five 
terawatt-hours today to 24 - 33 terawatt-hours by 2030. 
Even using the most conservative estimate, the existing 
capacity and the capacity addition in the pipeline would 
clearly not be sufficient to meet demand by 2030. 
IRENA’s costing analysis anticipates that Tanzania could 
benefit from the global trend of rapid cost reductions 
in wind and solar power alongside local policies to 
promote the renewable energy. Given these patterns, it 
suggests that the levelised cost of electricity generation 
for grid-connected renewable technologies could be 
reduced by 17% for biomass, 50% for wind and 36% for 
solar PV compared to 2013
Master Plan with some updates from IRENA’s range 
of evaluations. These may well be different from 
the perspective of the energy planners in Tanzania. 
Since our assessment is strongly influenced by these 
assumptions, IRENA encourages the energy planners 
in Tanzania to explore different policy assumptions and 
scenarios needed to justify or to elaborate challenges 
associated with certain investment decisions.
The starting point of this analysis is an assessment of 
current power plants and identification of new scheduled 
capacity additions already under construction (Figure 
16), including the retirement schedule for older power 
plants. According to the latest statistics (2013), the total 
installed capacity in the Tanzanian power system is
1,393 MW which includes 832 MW of thermal capacity, from 
which 454 MW is run on natural gas, 351 MW run on oil and 
27 MW on biomass plus 561 MW of hydropower. Only small 
capacities (42 MW gas and 171 MW oil) are expected to be 
decommissioned within the planning time horizon.
Figure 16: Retirement schedule of existing plants and plants under construction
Biomass Coal Hydro Oil Gas
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
Operating Capacity (MW)
2 000
1 800
1 600
1 400
1 200
800
600
400
200
1 000
In this scenario, three resource zones for wind, solar 
PV, and CSP (nine renewable energy zones in total) are 
included in the analysis. For each type of technology, 
the three “best” zones are identified on the basis of 
economic criteria alone. This is worked out from the total 
LCOE of a representative project from each zone, taking 
into account resource quality, transmission investment 
needs and road construction needs. The wind zones 
selected are located in the Iringa province in the centre 
of the country, as well as the Arusha province in the 
14 The Power System Master Plan was used for the analysis 
because it provides more detailed information on 
additional capacities and their timelines, unlike the 
Electricity Supply Industry Reform Roadmapnortheast. The selected PV and CSP zones are in the 
upper central part of the country in Sigida.15 The sum 
of the maximum output from the three zones is beyond 
the projected demand for 2030 for each technology.16
As shown in Figure 17, the installed capacity of utilityscale solar PV and wind projects in this scenario would 
reach 3.7 GW and 1.9 GW by 2030 respectively. Solar 
PV starts to be an important part of capacity mix in 
the early 2020s, while wind is introduced in the second 
half of the decade. Since 694 MW of gas-fuelled power 
plant investment is already in the pipeline (i.e. under 
construction), gas is the most important fuel for power 
generation over the next decade. However, there is 
considerable gain from exporting the gas resources 
instead of using them for domestic power production. 
The country’s coal reserves may be exploited to some 
extent, providing affordable baseload power. However, 
the further expansion of coal-fired plants is not part 
of a least-cost energy system by 2030. Until then, 
no additional capacity is projected for oil-powered 
plants, whose share of the capacity mix will be as low 
as 2%. Assessments show that by 2030 peak demand 
As shown in Figure 18 below, a transition to such a 
system would require USD 11.4 billion investment in 
generation and USD 67 billion in transmission and 
reaches 4.5 GW, and the sum of installed capacity for 
dispatchable power plants (i.e. hydropower, gas, oil and 
coal) also amounts to about 4.5 GW. To ensure there is 
balance in a system with such a high share of installed 
variable renewables capacity, strong interconnections 
are needed with neighbouring countries, as well as 
enough reserve power.
IRENA’s analysis also finds that 378 MW may be sourced 
from decentralised generation, which will account for 
almost 4% of total electricity supply. Decentralised 
generation will consist mainly of mini-hydropower 
options and oil generators, where solar PV may be 
introduced by the end of the decade. 
15 The zones included in the analysis are as follows: AB, AH, K 
for wind (as in Figure 11), Z, AG and R for solar PV (as in 
Figure 14), M, N, and O for CSP (as in Figure 13). 
16 Maximum deployment of these technologies is set at
500 MW per zone. In assessing the penetration of 
renewable energy, consideration is given to the “must 
run” minimum generation limit which cannot be replaced 
by variable renewable energy and is experienced by some 
fossil based technologies. This limit is set at 50% for coalfired plants and 25% for future gas power plants.
Figure 17: Capacity balance according to IRENA’s assessment
Dist. Solar PV
Hydro Nuclear Gas Oil Coal
Mini Hydro Biomass Oil Wind Solar Thermal Solar PV
Biomass
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
0
2 000
4 000
6 000
8 000
10 000
12 000
Installed Capacity (MW)
maintenance (O&M) and fuel costs would amount to 
USD 4.9 billion and USD 6.5 billion respectively. The 
average generation cost would drop by 17% between Figure 18: Total undiscounted system costs according to IRENA
s assessment
Import costs O&M costs generation Total fuel Annualized domestic T&D investment costs
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
500
1 000
1 500
2 000
2 500
3 000
Million USD
USD/MWh
Annualized investment: Generation Average generation costs (USD/MWh), right axis
These may well be different from the perspective of 
the energy planners in Tanzania. Since the present 
assessment is strongly influenced by assumptions 
discussed above, IRENA encourages the energy planners 
in Tanzania to explore different policy assumptions and 
scenarios needed to justify or to work out the challenges 
associated with certain investment decisions. 
RECOMMENDATION:
Revise national energy plans
Energy planners in Tanzania need to revise the country’s 
plans by taking into account the latest studies on 
renewable energy potential and their associated costs. 
They need to explore different policy assumptions and 
scenarios to justify or to work out challenges associated 
with certain investment decisions. This can be followed 
by an updated “roadmap” for realising the desired 
investment strategy. 
4.3 Policy and regulatory frameworks
The Electricity Act 2008 gives priority access to the 
grid for electric energy from a least-cost generation 
licensee. This is not conducive to power generation 
based on variable renewableswhich is currently more 
power generation if capital costing is considered 
alone. Variability has been dealt with in the draft 
Electricity (Systems Operation) Act 2016, which is 
under approval. This gives priority for dispatch to the 
electricity generated from renewable energy sources 
and indigenous sources. 
However, this act does not specify any guidelines for 
power forecast time. Current forecast times are not 
necessarily favourable to all renewable energy types, 
particularly given the variable nature of some sources 
(solar and wind). The best practice recommended 
forecast time is closer to real time, which will have a 
substantial impact on the cost-effectiveness of the 
renewable energy generators. Furthermore, the use of 
forecasts favourable to renewables will entail changes 
in the power systems operations given that the grid 
infrastructure and grid operators currently do not have 
the capacity to accommodate and manage grids with 
higher shares of variable renewables.
In Tanzania the distribution network operator bears 
the interconnection costs for projects within 10 km of a 
substation. However, there is no reference to connection 
and wheeling charges, so that the charges are related 
to the generation sources. Common practice shows that 
the charges are higher for renewables such as wind and 
solar because of their variabilityTo incentivise grid-tied some countries are given the option to pay transmission 
and wheeling charges at a cost equivalent to the average 
unit cost of electricity wheeled through the grid. 
Despite the existence of FiTs and SPPAs for gridconnected projects, the weak financial position of 
TANESCO, the sole off-taker, means renewables-based 
power generation is not attracting private investors. 
This is confirmed by the latest TANESCO financial 
statements (2013, 2012 and 2011 annual reports) 
Furthermore, changes in debt-to-asset and equity-toasset values,18 as well as the utility’s negative returns 
on asset and on equity, indicate an increasingly high 
financial risk (see Figures 20 and 21 below).
17 The cash ratio of a company should not exceed 0.1 because
higher values could indicate poor asset utilisation.
18 The combined values of the debt-to-asset and the equityto-asset ratios is always equal to 1. However, the values of 
debt-to-asset ratios should be below 0.5, and equity-toasset ratios above 0.5. This would indicate that the assets 
of the company are less tied to debt.
highlighting that current assets minus inventories cover 
less than 55% of current debts, including deferred 
income. As the ratios below demonstrate, the liquidity 
of the company is below where it ought to be, and 
the cash ratio17 is relatively high (see Figure 19 below), 
which could indicate poor asset utilisation.
Figure 19: TANESCO liquidity ratios 2010-2013
Figure 20: TANESCO debt-to-asset and
equity-to-assets ratio
Figure 21: Profitability ratios, 2011-2013
2012
2013
2011
2010
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Current ratio Quick ratio Cash ratio
Based on TANESCO annual reports, 2011-2013
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
2010 2011 2012 2013
Debt to assets ratio Equity to assets ratio
-0.7
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
2011 2012 2013
Return on assets Return on equityThe creditworthiness of TANESCO has been put into context through two other public utilities from the region: 
Botswana Power Company and Mozambique Electricity (Electricidade de Moçambique). The results of this analysis 
can be seen in Table 9.
The analysis of the ratios shows at first glance that none 
of the utilities analysed is significantly more profitable 
than the others. Yet TANESCO’s profitability ratios 
have been in constant decline, while Botswana Power 
Company and Electricidade de Moçambique have been 
improving their positions in the timeframe analysed.
There seems to be increasing reliance on debt in 
Botswana Power Company and TANESCO, which gives 
both those utility companies a higher debt-to-equity 
ratio than 2 after 2012, going up to 4.03 for TANESCO 
in 2013. Through market mechanisms – mainly interest 
rate swaps – Botswana Power Company has managed to 
keep its financing costs low. This gave it a very positive 
interest coverage ratio (the quotient of earnings before 
interest payments by financing costs).
In the liquidity ratios, TANESCO seems to be keeping 
a very high cash position, highlighted by a cash ratio 
substantially higher than the recommended value of 0.1. 
This could indicate poor asset utilisation.
The conclusion of this ratio analysis emphasises the 
low creditworthiness of TANESCO, which weakens its 
position as off-taker to private investors venturing into 
power generation in Tanzania. This is exacerbated by 
the fact that if TANESCO defaults or delays payment, 
the Government of Tanzania cannot guarantee the 
payment, and no sanction can be taken against the 
off-taker. This increases the perception of risk on the 
part of the private sector and partly justifies its low 
involvement in the segment
TANESCO
(Tanzania)
BPC
(Botswana)
EdM
(Mozambique)
Ratios 2010 2011 2012 2013 2010 2011 2012 2013 2010 2011 2012 2013
Liquidity
Current ratio 0.69 0.63 0.48 0.69 0.55 0.50 0.41 0.32 0.16 0.11 0.10 0.11
Quick ratio 0.57 0.52 0.38 0.55 0.48 0.42 0.31 0.20 0.23 0.19 0.20 0.18
Cash ratio 0.21 0.21 0.11 0.19 0.07 0.25 0.11 0.05 0.16 0.11 0.10 0.11
Debt
Debt to assests 0.52 0.59 0.69 0.80 0.50 0.65 0.71 0.73 0.59 0.58 0.52 0.58
Equity to assets 0.48 0.41 0.31 0.20 0.50 0.65 0.71 0.73 0.59 0.58 0.52 0.58
Debt to equity 1.07 1.44 2.25 4.03 1.01 1.82 2.48 2.66 1.43 1.36 1.09 1.35
Interest coverage -0.77 -3.34 -4.53 154.74 70.49 132.02 139.38 -0.07 -0.72 -0.75 -0.61
Profitability
Return on assests -0.015 -0.053 -0.124 -0.116 -0.055 -0.109 -0.024 -0.010 -0.018 0.003 -0.002
Return on equity -0.36 -0.174 -0.623 -0.233 -0.156 -0.380 -0.086 -0.025 0.043 0.006 -0.004
Table 9: Financial ratio comparison table for sample utilities of southern and eastern Africa
Based on the annual reports of TANESCO, Botswana Power Company and Electricidade de Moçambique
Finally, we recommend power output off-take beyond 
the capacity subscribed to in the power purchase 
agreement, partly to boost private operator confidence 
for further investments in grid-tied renewable energy 
installations.
RECOMMENDATION:
Provide incentives in Electricity System 
Operation Rules
Given that Tanzania is a member of the SAPP, where 
the day-ahead market is already in place, the draft 
Electricity System Operation Rules 2016 need to be 
revised to include provisions in forecasts for better 
integration of renewable energy in power systems. This 
let renewables contribute more to meeting the growing 
power demand of the country.
For renewables to play a more relevant role in meeting 
increasing power demand, Tanzania could look into 
acquiring the necessary infrastructure, including 
sophisticated information and communication tools, 
for more efficient system-wide decision making. 
Furthermore, grid operators will need to acquire the 
ability to integrate forecast data into their daily operations 
to manage grids with a high share of renewables. 
If Tanzania were eligible for the Regional Liquidity 
Support Facility, this could mitigate TANESCO’s power 
off-taker risk, as further discussed below. IRENA and 
other international partners should work to facilitate 
Tanzania’s inclusion into the facilityFurthermore, Tanzania is recommended to consider 
adopting transmission and wheeling charges conducive 
to variable renewables. This should be clearly 
mentioned in the draft Electricity Systems Operations 
Act 2016. In addition, the private generators could be 
given the flexibility to sell their surplus power to the 
grid operator.
4.4 Private sector involvement
Private operators already participate a great deal 
in the provision of electricity in Tanzania although 
their installations are to a very large extent based on 
As discussed in the planning scenario, Tanzania will 
require USD 11.4 billion investment in generation, and 
USD 6.7 billion in transmission and distribution between 
2013 and 2030. O&M and fuel costs would amount 
to USD 4.9 billion and USD 6.5 billion respectively. 
Average generation cost would decline by 17% between 
2013 and 2030. 
According to Bloomberg New Energy Finance, the 
finance flowing into the Tanzanian renewable energy 
sector amounted only to USD 88 million in 2014 
(Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 2016). Most of this 
was provided through debt financing (as shown in 
Figure 23).
thermal technologies (liquid fuel and natural gas). 
Operated by private actors, IPPs and emergency power 
producers, they together represented nearly 40% of 
installed capacity in March 2013 (AfDB, 2015). However, 
private sector participation in renewables-based
technology development is still minimal, as Figure 22 
demonstrates. 
The private sector’s low involvement in the renewable 
energy field is primarily due to the very restrictive 
financial environment. Obtaining investment loans is 
difficult because of the high cost of borrowing, which 
not only includes interest rates as high as 16% (Bank of 
Tanzania, 2016) but also high bank charges.
Figure 22: Renewables-based power generation market in Tanzania 
IPP
26%
SPP
2%
EPP
13%
TANESCO
59%
EPP
31.0
TANESCO
561.8
Based on “Renewable Energy in Africa: Tanzania Country Profile”, AfDB, 2015
Figure 23: New build renewable asset finance in 
Tanzania by type
30
20
10
0
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
Debt finance Equity finance Other finance
Million USDThe RRA discussions disclosed other concerns, which 
are described below.
Limited knowledge of renewables by the financial 
sector: Limited knowledge of the renewable energy 
sector among lenders who appraise projects obstructs 
the facilitation of financing for developing renewables in 
Tanzania. Despite the introduction of policy incentives, 
most domestic banks still lack capacity to plan, structure 
and evaluate projects using suitable financial instruments. 
This reinforces the perception that renewable energy is a 
high-risk venture, since there is a lack of awareness of the 
costs and of technology reliability.
Lack of established quality control and technical 
standard mechanisms: No well-established quality 
control mechanism has been devised for renewable 
energy equipment, even though such equipment 
is exempt from value-added tax and benefits from 
reductions in import duties. If no policy measures are 
taken, substandard products will flood the market, 
affecting the confidence of developers who invest in 
renewable energy and technology uptake. Moreover, 
the life span of projects could be affected, thus 
increasing the risk of higher operational costs and 
altering strategic financial management of the project.
The high collateral requirements: In line with the 
prudential regulations of the Bank of Tanzania, the 
borrower is required to provide a collateral of at least 
125% of the credit accommodation. This is high and 
restricts potential borrowers because banks in Tanzania 
have developed stringent processes that do not permit 
fund disbursement before perfecting the collateral. In 
addition, the valuation methodology for collateral is 
lengthy. Such collateral in Tanzania includes real estate 
and tangible moveable property, for which valuation 
can be complex.
The mismatch between deposits and loans: The effect 
of the high collateral requirement is exacerbated by 
the inability of banks to provide long-term financing 
due to the mismatch between long-term deposits and 
long-term loans. The Bank of Tanzania sets a regulatory 
20% minimum ratio between liquid assets and demand 
liabilities, which banks strive to follow by setting an even 
higher ratio. In March 2014, the weighted average loanto-deposit ratio was 71.9%, up from 68.8% in 2013 (The 
Business Year, 2015). Those customer deposits provide 
very little room for manoeuvre for the provision of longterm loans if the proportion of short-term deposits and 
short-term loans is discounted.
High risk for the private sector: Liquidity concerns 
exacerbated by power off-taker risk undermine the 
creation of new IPPs, whose creditworthiness with 
banks largely depends on power off-taker ability to 
guarantee timely and reliable payments. In the absence 
of a government guarantee mechanism, obtaining a 
letter of credit from a commercial bank would require 
full cash collateral from the off-takers. Yet due to their 
constrained liquidity and poor credit ratings, many 
off-takers like TANESCO are unable to put down cash 
collateral for a letter of credit. This cascading liquidity 
risk (arising from off-taker risk) can be overcome by a 
liquidity facility that would provide a short-term letter 
of credit or credit line to IPPs without additional cash 
requirements from utilities.
Other issues: Other factors obstruct renewables 
investments. For instance, potential customers have 
low purchasing power, especially in rural areas. 
Renewable energy upfront investment costs are high, 
and the project development lead time is too long. 
Land acquisition is a costly and lengthy process, and 
environment impact assessments and hydropower 
water use rights permitting are both cumbersome. 
RECOMMENDATIONS:
To foster the participation of the private sector in 
renewable energy development, the following steps are 
recommended: 
Promote long-term equity financing for renewable 
energy projects through non-banking financial 
institutions
Tanzania could consider the possibility of empowering 
the domestic financial sector to provide equity 
investments into renewable energy technologies, 
especially through the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange. 
This would be welcomed by the Dar es Salaam Stock 
Exchange, which has appealed for an enabling 
environment that favours increased utilisation of 
the stock exchange by the private sector19 under the 
supervision of the Capital Markets and Securities 
Authority. Through the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, 
the government should also promote the use of mutual 
funds20 to increase private sector participation as well as 
reducing the risk associated with financing renewable 
energy projects through pooling. The UK Green 
Investment Bank’s Offshore Wind Fund created by the 
UK Government, which is also its sole shareholder, is an 
example illustrating the co-operation between energy 
and financial authorities to boost renewables.
19 Corporate bonds and most of the equity and government
bond papers issued and listed on the Dar es Salaam Stock 
Exchange have been oversubscribed by up to twice the 
amount available. This shows the extent of liquidity in the 
hands of the Tanzanian private sector.
20 These currently only represent 0.1% of asset allocations in 
the Tanzanian financial system.UK Green Investment Bank Offshore 
Wind Fund
The UK Green Investment Bank Offshore Wind 
Fund was established with the aim of attracting 
capital into the UK’s offshore wind sector from 
new, long-term investors seeking good, riskadjusted returns. The fund is the world’s first 
dedicated offshore wind fund and has a target size 
of GBP 1 billion (approximately USD 1.247 billion). 
The combination of natural resources (strong and 
consistent wind), favourable locations for turbines, 
a robust regulatory regime and a well-established 
and experienced industry has helped the UK 
secure its position as one of the global leaders in 
the development of offshore wind.
In addition to its own investments in the UK’s 
offshore wind market, the UK Green Investment 
Bank established a fund through its wholly 
owned subsidiary UK Green Investment Bank 
Financial Services Limited to invest in operating 
offshore wind farms in the UK. Attracting new 
capital and creating a liquid market for operating 
assets is crucial to the continued growth of the 
sector and will also help to reduce the long-term 
cost of finance. New investors also allow the 
original developers to sell down their stakes and 
use the proceeds to finance new projects. The 
fund’s portfolio currently consists of interests in 
five operational wind farms with an aggregate 
installed capacity of 1,177 MW.
Source: UK Green Investment Bank (2016)
Improve facilitation, collaboration and co-ordination 
among private sector and financial institutions
In line with the previous recommendation, the Government 
of Tanzania should establish a framework to enhance 
facilitation, collaboration and co-ordination among private 
renewable energy firms and financial institutions. This will 
increase financial institution knowledge of the renewable 
energy sector while giving private renewable energy firms 
more understanding of the inner working of the financial 
system. Close co-operation of this kind will help reduce 
the perception of risk in the renewable energy sector and 
thus encourage financing.
Create a risk mitigation mechanism for 
local investments
In light of the low participation of the Tanzanian private 
sector partly as a result of stringent requirements 
from the Tanzanian banking sector, a risk mitigation 
mechanism is a possible option to facilitate greater 
participation in priority development areas by local 
investors, including in energy.
Under the “Big Results Now” initiative promoted by the Office 
of the President, this risk mitigation facility could provide 
guarantees for viable local projects within the initiative to 
The size of the proposed risk mitigation facility would 
have to be co-ordinated with international partners and 
could build on the initial mobilisation of capital in the 
following ways:
• charges and levies on electricity concessions and 
electricity sold to end-users
• taxes on bulk electricity consumers
• taxes on mining and oil exploration
• taxes on transport and marketing of petroleum 
products
• taxes on commercial licences
• annual budgetary allocation by the state
• funding from development partners
• personal contributions from operators and other 
donors.
In addition, this risk mitigation facility could be 
considered from a regional point of view. A risk 
mitigation facility to empower local private investors 
could be established with the participation of the 
region’s countries and facilitated through COMESA’s 
Regional Investment Agency. 
Tanzania could join the Regional Liquidity Support 
Facility21 under development by IRENA, German 
development bank KfW and the Africa Trade Insurance 
Agency. Its purpose is to resolve the type of liquidity 
risk affecting African power off-takers, and it will 
provide short-term credit lines to IPPs. It aims to enable 
financial closure for renewable energy projects and 
ease the cash flow constraints on utility balance sheets 
in five pilot countries in sub-Saharan Africa (Ghana, 
Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda and Zambia) (IRENA, 2016). 
Tanzania’s eligibility for the Regional Liquidity Support 
Facility would help mitigate TANESCO’s power off-taker 
risk. IRENA and other international partners should 
work to facilitate Tanzania’s inclusion into the facility.
By disclosing the performance of utilities, the Regional 
Liquidity Support Facility also aims to improve the 
payment records of utilities and set a reliable benchmark 
for future lending practices. 
Success in the pilot countries will enable the facility 
to expand to other countries in sub-Saharan Africa. 
If applied in Tanzania, this model may demonstrate a 
way to resolve TANESCO’s low creditworthiness and its 
liquidity risk.
21 A funding proposal for the Regional Liquidity Support
Facility has been submitted to the Green Climate Fund and 
was due to be reviewed by the fund’s board by the end of 
2016. Once its financing has been approved, the facility will 
be able to tackle shortfalls in short-term cash flow in
the target countries. IRENA facilitates dialogue between 
governments, while KfW, the Green Climate Fund and the
Africa Trade Insurance Agency will manage the cash
collateral and provide short-term liquidity risk insurance
for additional leverage on the Regional Liquidity Support Like other types of incentives for private participation 
in the grid-tied power sector, the private sector 
should be given guarantees of priority place when 
funds are disbursed. This will be dependent on the
legal agreements between TANESCO and its different 
debtors. 
4.5 Human capacity and skills
The RRA process uncovered weaknesses in the 
availability of human resource and institutional 
capacities and skills in Tanzania’s renewable energy 
sector. These shortcomings will need to be adequately 
resolved if Tanzania is to overcome the challenges 
ahead. It needs to develop a renewable energy sector 
as well as meet future challenges related to goals in 
the Electricity Supply Industry Reform Strategy and 
Roadmap 2014 - 2025 and beyond.
Tanzania’s human resource capacity deficiencies are 
listed below:
• resource assessment
• renewable energy data collection through statistics 
to evaluate data, potential and progress, and to plan 
for a renewable energy future
• renewable energy project conceptualisation, 
preparation, appraisal and implementation
• local courses and training related to renewable 
energy. 
The Tanzanian Electricity Supply Industry Reform 
Strategy and Roadmap 2014 - 2025 recognised that the 
availability of well-trained and skilled human capital is 
essential to meet targets set out in the roadmap, and that 
a human capital development programme needs to be 
created. The results of the planning work described in the 
second section of chapter 4 indicate that employment in 
the renewable electricity sector in Tanzania could reach 
36,000 in 2030 under the renewable energy scenario. 
This is around six times as high as in 2015 (Figure 24a). 
In 2015, the sector employed more than 6,000 people, 
mostly in hydropower and biomass projects. While most 
of these jobs were in centralised applications, around 
1,000 people were also employed in construction and 
O&M of distributed small hydropower. 
In 2030, distributed and centralised solar PV will be 
the largest renewable energy employer, with more than 
20,000 jobs. This will be followed by small hydropower, 
large hydropower, wind and biomass (Figure 24b). 
Jobs in utility-scale solar PV are expected to rise 
sharply from 2020 as Tanzania moves ahead with plans 
for deploying around 3.8 GW by 2030. From 2023 
onwards, wind energy employment may also grow as 
plans for deploying 1.8 GW by 2030 are set in motion. 
Jobs in large hydropower may remain stagnant due to 
lack of new investments after 2020 but jobs in small 
hydropower will rise with new installations. 
Figure 24a: Estimates for jobs in renewable electricity by technology and year
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030
0
15
10
5
20
25
30
35
40
Thousand JobsFigure 24b: Breakdown of jobs by technology
in 2030
Figure 25: Renewable energy jobs in 2030 by 
value chain segment
Dist. Solar PV
994
Mini Hydro
4 420
Hydro
4 287
Wind
3 993
Biomass
3 352
Solar PV
19 190
Fuel production
3% Manufacturing
9%
Decomm.
11%
O&M
22%
C&I
55%
Analysis of the segments of the value chain provides 
further insights. In 2030, the construction and 
installation segment is expected to account for the bulk 
of the jobs, followed by O&M, decommissioning and 
manufacturing (Figure 25). Most of the construction 
and installation jobs are in solar PV project installation, 
which is likely to be filled by construction workers, 
technicians and engineers. Around 30% of O&M jobs 
are in large hydropower, and are mostly taken by 
managers, engineers and technicians. Though low to 
start with, the share of manufacturing jobs is likely to 
increase to 9% by 2030, and production of different 
components including electrical equipment, solar PV 
mounting structures and parts of wind towers will be 
local. Several other types of job opportunities will be 
At the vocational training level, only five of the 40 institutions across the country offer courses related clearly to the 
renewable energy projects value chain. These are listed in Table 11.
created for experts in marketing, distribution and supply 
chain management in all technologies, especially the 
small-scale solar PV value chain.
The human capital development programme will thus 
need to be designed to cover all the different aspects of 
renewable energy project conception, implementation 
and operation. This includes but is not limited to 
technical, managerial, finance and evaluation.
In Tanzania, some higher education institutions offer 
related subjects in electrical engineering. However, 
the courses specifically tailored to renewable energy
at higher education level are offered as shown in
Table 10.
Institution Relevant programme Level
University of Dar es Salaam Master of Science in Renewable Energy MSc
Arusha Technical College Ordinary Diploma in Renewable Energy 
Technology
Undergraduate 
diploma
Dar es Salaam Institute of Technology Ordinary Diploma in Renewable Energy 
Technology
Undergraduate 
diploma
Table 10: Renewable energy higher education coursesGiven the country’s potential for scaling up renewables, 
the scale and range of courses on offer needs to be 
increased. They need to be expanded to all aspects of 
renewable energy project development at the technical, 
managerial and financial level.
Different skills will need to be continuously upgraded at 
all levels to reinforce local capacities starting from the 
conceptualisation stage of renewable energy projects all 
the way through to financial engineering, construction 
and O&M. They also need to be geared towards 
innovation – a key feature of the energy industry.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
Given these challenges and the current conditions 
in Tanzania, the recommendations that follow are 
intended to prepare the ground for renewable energy 
development in terms of human capacities and skills: 
Intensify and expand renewable energy training
• Higher education and vocational education 
The training institutions need to co-operate with 
technical institutions already offering electrical 
engineering courses while acquiring the capacity to 
diversify into renewables. These institutions include, 
for instance, the Nelson Mandela African Institute 
of Science and Technology, Mandela Institute of 
Technology and the Mbeya University of Science 
and Technology. They should also work with the 
Vocational Educational and Training Authority 
in order to benefit from its presence across the 
country.
The suggested expansion in vocational education 
should be regarded as a full programme of capacity 
Institution Relevant programme Level
Arusha College of Electronics Certificates in electronics Vocational training
Mafinga Lutheran Vocational Training Centre
Courses in mechanics, metal work and 
welding, masonry and building, plumbing 
and painting
Vocational training
Samanga Catholic Vocational and Training 
Center
Courses in electrical installation, welding and 
fabrications Vocational training
Tanzania Institute of Commerce and 
Industries Courses in electrical installation Vocational training
Vocational Education and Training Authority Electrical installation, electrical and 
telecommunications, welding and masonry Vocational training
Table 11: Vocational training institutions offering courses relevant to electricity projects
market in which there is a continuous supply of 
relevant skills. This should provide a solid pipeline 
that will support policies related to local content in 
renewable energy project development by foreign 
investors in Tanzania.
As explained above, construction and installation 
will account for around 20,000 of the 36,250 jobs 
that will be required in the renewable energy project 
value chain in Tanzania. Around 11,000 will be 
needed in fuel production, 2,900 in manufacturing, 
4,000 in decommissioning and 7,900 in O&M. The 
Government of Tanzania needs to expand these 
various elements to all the vocational training 
centres across the country in order to meet these 
skills availability targets.
In addition, a renewable energy programme should 
be promoted within Tanzania’s top business schools, 
such as the Tanzania Business School. It should 
develop training courses and courses aimed at 
increasing the financial and business knowledge of 
projects based on renewable energy technologies 
in the country. This could help to bridge the gap 
between project development and project appraisal, 
which is one of the main constraints the local 
private sector faces as it develops and implements 
its projects.
This capacity enhancement at the vocational 
education level could be financed through charges 
applied on foreign investments, state allocations 
and other contributions. 
• On-the-job training
New and young engineers entering the local job 
marketespecially in the power sectorshould be of the power system. This will familiarise them 
with practical aspects of the value chain and will 
create well-trained engineers with a comprehensive 
overview of the power system. It will help improve 
the overall quality of human resources in the sector.
The intensification and expansion of training 
related to renewable energy is beneficial because 
it reduces costs. Local staff is cheaper to employ 
than expatriates, and overall staffing costs incurred 
by project developers decrease as local human 
resource content increases. Value is retained along 
the value chain through the skills base created. This 
is not only an advantage to Tanzania but will spread 
across the region and continent.
However, for capacity enhancement schemes to 
be effective, incentives have to be put in place so 
that the labour force will acquire the necessary 
skills. Job security and job growth are among the 
incentives needed.
Design and implement local-content requirements 
for renewable energy projects 
Local-content requirements generate broad benefits like 
secure job creation, ensuring that labour is employed 
and products manufactured within the country to feed 
or support renewable energy development. Tanzania 
could consider examples from other countries doing 
the same in the sub-Saharan African region such as 
South Africa, Kenya and Ghana.
South Africa follows a progressive model which set the 
local-content requirement at 35% in 2011 and is aiming 
for 60% by 2030. In Ghana, the local-content rule came 
into force in 2013 with a threshold of 10% aiming for 90% 
by growing 10% each year. This array of models provides 
a basis from which Tanzania could form its own localcontent requirement policy.
Establish a national renewable energy research centre
Given the inconsistency of statistical data and lack of 
quality control or standard-setting mechanisms, the 
Government of Tanzania should create and provide the 
capacity for a renewable energy centre whose mandate 
would be as follows: 
• establish a legal and institutional framework for 
assembling renewable energy statistics
• collect and store all relevant statistics and resource 
information on renewables
• provide easier access to renewable energy 
information and resolve inconsistencies in the data
• conduct a data audit to ascertain data gaps. 
This process should start off by equipping the statistics 
staff with the necessary knowledge of renewable 
energy statistical methods.
To make further use of the statistical data it stores, this 
renewable energy research centre could be equipped 
with testing facilities and given the capacity to establish 
standards and codes. This would ensure satisfactory 
guidelines for the quality, design, safety and O&M 
of renewable energy equipment used in small-scale 
applications to stimulate the response to the existing 
policy incentives. The formation of a methodological 
quality control and standards mechanism for 
renewable energy equipment could also feed into the 
recommended local-content requirement policy. The 
role of quality control will increase as more content is 
sourced locally.
Modern bioenergy offers great development potential 5. SUMMARY OF
RECOMMENDED 
ACTIONS
Action Revise national energy plans
Theme Resource assessment and planning
Description
Revise plans by considering latest studies on potentials and on technology costs and also 
by exploring different policy scenarios needed for investment decisions followed by an 
investment strategy roadmap
Actors Ministry of Energy and Minerals
Timing 12 - 18 months
Keys to success Capacitation and engagement of all stakeholders and creation of platform for interaction 
and information exchange among relevant institutions
Action Provide incentives in Electricity System Operation Rules
Theme Policy and regulatory frameworks
Description
• Forecasts to include assumptions of greater integration of renewable energy in power 
systems 
• Consider the adoption of transmission and wheeling charges conducive to variable 
renewables
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• EWURA
• Tanzania Electric Supply Company 
Timing 12 - 18 months
Keys to success Capacitation and engagement of all stakeholders and creation of platform for interaction 
and information exchange among relevant institutions
Action Promote long-term equity financing for renewable energy projects through 
non-banking financial institutions
Theme Private sector involvement
Description
Empower the domestic financial sector especially by working with the Dar es Salaam 
Stock Exchange and the Capital Markets and Securities Authority to provide equity 
investment in renewable energy projects
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• Capital Markets and Securities Authority
• Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange
Timing 18 - 24 months
Kt
Productive collaboration and knowledge-sharing between all relevant stakeholders from Action Improve facilitation, collaboration and co-ordination among private sector 
and financial institutions
Theme Private sector involvement
Description
Establish a framework to enhance facilitation, co-operation and co-ordination among 
renewable energy private actors and financial institutions so that the two sectors become 
better informed about each other
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• Bank of Tanzania
• Ministry of Finance and Planning
• Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment
Timing 12 months
Keys to success Awareness of the benefits of a multi-sectoral collaborative approach in the development 
of renewable energy
Action Create a risk mitigation mechanism for local investments
Theme Private sector involvement
Description
Create a local risk mitigation facility to encourage local private sector participation. 
It could provide liquidity support as well as guarantees and could facilitate access to 
substantial bank loans
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment
• Ministry of Foreign Affairs, East African Community, COMESA
• IRENA
• Green Climate Fund 
• KfW
• African Trade Insurance Agency
Timing 12 - 24 months
Keys to success Engagement of all relevant stakeholders at national and regional level, as well as with 
international development partners
Action Intensify and expand renewable energy training
Theme Human capacity and skills
Description
Make full use of current wide vocational training facility networks as well as higher 
education institutions to create a local supply of relevant labour skills along the value 
chain of renewable energy project development
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Vocational Training
• Planning Commission
Timing 12 - 24 months
Keys to success Collaboration between the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Energy as well as 
with the Planning CommissionAction Design and implement local-content requirements for renewable 
energy projects
Theme Human capacity and skills
Description Implement local-content requirement for labour and manufactured products for 
renewable energy projects in order to create demand for relevant local labour
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• Planning Commission
• Ministry of Industry, Trade and Investment
Timing 12 months
Keys to success Assessment of the current and potential manufacturing capacities in the country
Action Establish a national renewable energy research centre
Theme Human capacity and skills
Description Resolve inconsistencies in statistical data and the lack of a quality control mechanism by 
creating and providing capacity for a renewable energy research centre
Actors
• Ministry of Energy and Minerals
• National Bureau of Statistics
• Tanzania Bureau of Standards
• IRENA
Timing 18 - 24 months
Keys to success Engagement of all relevant stakeholders6. REFERENCES
AfDB (2015), “Renewable energy in Africa -- Tanzania country profile”, Renewable Energy in Africa, 
www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Generic-Documents/Renewable_Energy_in_Africa_-_Tanzania.pdf. 
AfDB, OECD and UNDP (2015), “African economic outlook 2015” in African Economic Outlook 2015, African Development Bank 
(AfDB), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), 
www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/sites/default/files/content-pdf/AEO2015_EN.pdf. 
Bank of Tanzania (2016), Monthly Economic Review, 
www.bot.go.tz/Publications/MonthlyEconomicReviews/MER%20MARCH%202016.pdf. 
Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2016), Newly Built Renewable Asset Finance in Tanzania by Type, Bloomberg New Energy Finance, 
available at www.bnef.com/core/country-profiles/tza.
Botswana Power Corporation (BPC) (2014), Annual Report 2013, 
www.bpc.bw/about-us/Annual%20Reports/BPC%202013%20AR%20Final.pdf.
BPC (2013), Annual Report 2012, www.bpc.bw/about-us/Annual%20Reports/BPC%20Annual%20Report%202012.pdf.
BPC (2011), Annual Report 2010, www.bpc.bw/about-us/Annual%20Reports/BPC%20Annual%20Report%202011.pdf.
CAMCO Clean Energy (2014), Biomass Energy Strategy (BEST) Tanzania, www.euei-pdf.org/sites/default/files/field_publication_file/
BEST_Biomass_Energy_Strategy_Tanzania_Final_Version_April_2014.pdf.
COMESA (2008), The COMESA Model Energy Policy Framework, Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa, 
http://programmes.comesa.int/attachments/article/133/Model%20Energy%20Policy%20Framework.pdf.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German Technical Cooperation Agency) (2009a), Project Development 
Programme in East Africa: Tanzania’ s Solar Energy Market. 
https://www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/gtz2009-en-targetmarketanalysis-solar-tanzania.pdf.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German Technical Cooperation Agency) (2009b), Project Development 
Programme in East Africa: Tanzania’s Wind Energy Market. Project Development Programme East Africa. 
https://www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/gtz2009-en-targetmarketanalysis-wind-tanzania.pdf.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (German Technical Cooperation Agency) (2009c), Project Development 
Programme in East Africa: Tanzania`s Small-Hydropower Energy Market. 
https://www.giz.de/fachexpertise/downloads/gtz2009-en-targetmarketanalysis-hydro-tanzania.pdf.
EdM, “Demonstrações financeiras da electricidade de Moçambique até 31 de Dezembro de 2013 (Financial Statements of Mozambique 
Electricity to 31 December 2013)”, Electricidade de Moçambique (Mozambique Electricity), www.edm.co.mz/index.php?option=com_
docman&task=doc_download&gid=185&Itemid=68&lang=en.
EdM, “Demonstrações financeiras da Electricidade de Moçambique até 31 de Dezembro de 2012 (Financial Statements of Mozambique 
Electricity to 31 December 2012)”, www.edm.co.mz/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=187&Itemid=68&lang=en.
EdM, “Demonstrações Financeiras da Electricidade de Moçambique até 31 de Dezembro de 2011 (Financial Statements of Mozambique 
Electricity to 31 December 2011)”, www.edm.co.mz/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=186&Itemid=68&lang=en.
Engery4impact (2016), Six Mini-Hydropower Projects in Tanzania Closer to Realising Goal of Power Generation, viewed on 6 
November 2016 at www.energy4impact.org/news/six-mini-hydropower-projects-tanzania-closer-realising-goal-power-generation. 
Food and Agriculture Organization (2010), “Global forest resources assessment 2010 -- country report Tanzania”, Food and 
Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy, www.fao.org/docrep/013/al657E/al657E.pdf.
Gebrehiwot, Z. (2013), “Eastern Africa Power Pool” in IRENA Workshop for Africa Clean Energy Corridor, 
http://web.vdw.co.za/Portals/15/Documents/Presentations/EAPP%20presentation_to_AFSEC-%205.pdf.
German Chambers of Commerce Abroad (Deutsche Auslandshandelskammern) (2013), Target Market Study Tanzania Solar PV and 
Wind Power, Nairobi, Kenya, www.africansolardesigns.com/resources_32_493092621.pdf. 
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania (2011), The Tanzania Development Vision 2025, Government of the United Republic 
of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania, www.mof.go.tz/mofdocs/overarch/vision2025.htm.
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania (2014), Invest in Tanzania, 
www.newsdeskmedia.com/images/Upload/PDFs/Invest-in-Tanzania-2014.pdf.
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania (2015), webpage, viewed 21 July 2015 at www.tanzania.go.tz/home/pages/19. 
Hansen, U. E., M.B. Pedersen and I. Nygaard (2014), “Review of solar PV market development in East Africa”, United Nations 
Environment Programme, www.uneprisoe.org/URC-Working-Paper-Series.
International Energy Agency (2012), “IEA statistics -- energy balances of non-OECD countries”, International Energy Agency, Paris, 
France, http://doi.org/10.1787/energy_bal_non-oecd-2013-en.Innovation Energie Développment (2014), National Electrification Program Prospectus, 
www.ied-sa.fr/index.php/en/documents-and-links/publications/send/3-reports/33-national-electrification-program-prospectus.html.
IRENA (2016), Unlocking Renewable Energy Investment: the Role of Risk Mitigation and Structured Finance, International Renewable 
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 
www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_Risk_Mitigation_and_Structured_Finance_2016.pdf.
IRENA (2015a), Africa Power Sector: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
www.irena.org/documentdownloads/Publications/IRENA_Africa_Power_Sector_synethesis_2015.pdf.
IRENA (2015b), Djibouti Renewables Readiness Assessment,IRENA, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 
www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_RRA_Djibout_2015_EN.pdf.
IRENA (2015c), Africa 2030: Roadmap for a Renewable Energy Future, IRENA, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 
www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA_Africa_2030_REmap_2015_low-res.pdf.
IRENA (2013), Southern African Power Pool: Planning and Prospects for Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 
www.irena.org/documentdownloads/publications/.pdf.
IRENA and LBNL (2015), Renewable Energy Zones For The Africa Clean Energy Corridor. Multi-Criteria Analysis For Planning 
Renewable Energy, IRENA, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, 
www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/IRENA-LBNL_Africa%20RE%20_CEC_2015.pdf.
Kibodya (2006), The Taking and Enforcement of Collateral – Financial Sector Review, 
http://info.worldbank.org/etools/docs/library/233790/Kibodya%20TBA.pdf.
Larsson, L., Davy, T., Jönsson, M., Hagström, L. and John, G. (2013). Draft Final Report: SIDA AND MEM Consultancy Services for the 
Joint Energy Sector Review (JESR) 2012/13, Tanzania. Pöyry SwedPower AB, Sweden.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2012), Tanzania (TZA) Profile of Exports, Imports and Trade Partners, The Observatory of 
Economic Complexity, viewed 23 July 2015 at https://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/tza/.
Mayalla, J. et al. (2011), “Geothermal development in Tanzania”, in Kenya Geothermal Conference 2011, Nairobi. Kenya, 
www.gak.co.ke/nibs/web_resources/GEOTHERMAL%20DEVELOPMENT%20IN%20TANZANIA.pdf.
MEM (2013a), “Power system master plan (May)”, pp. 333–335, 
www.tanesco.co.tz/index.php/investments/investment-report/22-power-system-master-plan-2012-update/file
(MEM, 2013b), Investment Plan for Tanzania -- Scaling-up Renewable Energy Programme, Ministry of Energy and Minerals (MEM), 
www-cif.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/default/files/meeting-documents/srep_tanzania_investment_plan_design.pdf. 
MEM (2013c), Joint Energy Sector Review (JESR), www.tzdpg.or.tz/fileadmin/documents/dpg_internal/dpg_working_groups_
clusters/cluster_1/Energy_and_Minerals/Key_Documents/JESR/JESR_Final_Report_2012-2013.pdf.
MEM (2014), Electricity Supply Industry Reform Strategy and Roadmap 2014-2025, 
www.gst.go.tz/images/TANZANIA%20ELECTRICITY%20SUPPLY%20INDUSTRY%20REFORM%20STRATEGY%20&%20ROADMAP.pdf.
MEM (2015a), The Draft National Energy Policy 2015, 
https://mem.go.tz/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/NATIONAL-ENERGY-POLICY-2015-Feb-2015.pdf.
MEM (2015b), Tanzania Energy Sector -- Challenges and Opportunities, Ministry of Energy and Minerals, Dar es Salaam, United 
Republic of Tanzania.
MNRT (2015), National Forest Resources Monitoring and Assessment of Tanzania (NAFoRMA), Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Tourism (MNRT), www.fao.org/forestry/43612-09cf2f02c20b55c1c00569e679197dcde.pdf.
Mnjokava, T. T. (2012), “Geothermal development in Tanzania – a country update”, in ARGEO-C4 Conference, Nairobi, Kenya.
Mnjokava, T. T. (2014), “Geothermal development in Tanzania – status report”, in Short Course IX on Exploration for Geothermal 
Resources, pp. 1–11,organised by UNU-GTP, GDC and KenGen at Lake Bogoria and Lake Naivasha, Kenya, 2-23 November 2014, Lake 
Bogoria and Lake Naivasha, Kenya.
Moremi, M. (2012), Business Financing in Tanzania (Challenges & Opportunities), www.globalskill.co.tz/docs/Moremi.pdf.
Nile Basin Initiative (2012), NELSAP at a Glance, nelsap.nilebasin.org/attachments/article/34/NELSAP%20AT%20A%20GLANCE.pdf.
Nzali, A. H. and S. J. S. Mushi (2006), “Wind energy utilization in Tanzania”, Science and Technology, 1–14, 
http://ewbusa.tizgee.com/files/2015/06/tanzaniawind.pdf.
OECD (2011), Effective support for Agricultural Development, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris 
France, www.oecd.org/dac/dac-global-relations/Final%20Report%20on%20Joint%20Study%20Visit%20to%20Tanzania.pdf.
OJK (2016), “OJK and energy and mineral resources ministry build cooperation in energy development”, press release, 
www.ojk.go.id/en/kanal/iknb/berita-dan-kegiatan/siaran-pers/Documents/Pages/Press-Release-OJK-and-Energy-and-MineralResources-Ministry-Build-Cooperation-in-Energy-Development/PR%20MOU%20OJK%20-%20ESDM.pdf. 
Ondraczek, J. (2013), “The sun rises in the east (of Africa): a comparison of the development and status of solar energy markets in 
Kenya and Tanzania”, Energy Policy, 56, 407–417, http://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.01.007.
REEEP (2014)Tanzania Policy and Regulatory OverviewsRenewable Energy and Energy Efficiency PartnershipRisø National Laboratory and Danish International Development Agency (2003), Wind Measurements and Wind Power Feasibility 
at Selected Sites in Tanzania 2000-2003 – Final Report.
Rural Electrification Corporation (2011), Power Sector Reform Strategies in Tanzania, 
www.academia.edu/5772406/Power_Sector_Reform_Strategies_in_Tanzania_Prepared_and_Presented_by_ACKNOWLEDGEMENT. 
Scaling up Renewable Energy Programme (SREP) (2013), Investment Plan for Tanzania, 
https://www-cif.climateinvestmentfunds.org/sites/default/files/meeting-documents/srep_tanzania_investment_plan_design.pdf.
Snc Lavalin and Parsons Brickenhoff (2011), Regional Power System Master Plan and Grid Code Study, 
www.eac.int/energy/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_download&gid=89&Itemid=70.
TANESCO (2013), TANESCO Tariff Review Application, 
www.newsite.ewura.go.tz/attachments/article/119/TANESCO%20Tariff%20Application%202013.pdf.
TANESCO (2014), TANESCO’S Transmission Network, viewed 24 July 2015 at: 
www.tanesco.co.tz/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=51&Itemid=159.
TANESCO (2015), “Tanzanian solar PV-hybrid” in P. Tsakhara (ed.), presentation at the Tanzanian solar PV-hybrid workshop, Berlin, 
Germany.
Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics (2013), “Tanzania in figures 2012”, 
www.nbs.go.tz/nbs/takwimu/references/Tanzania_in_figures2012.pdf.
Tanzania National Bureau of Statistics (2015), “National accounts of Tanzania mainland 2007-2014”, 
www.nbs.go.tz/nbs/takwimu/na/National_Accounts_of_Tanzania%20_Mainland_Publication_2014.pdf.
Tanzania Geothermal Development Company (2015), Geothermal Development in Tanzania – a Country Update, Dodoma, Tanzania, 
www.geothermal-energy.org/pdf/IGAstandard/ARGeo/2012/Mnjokava.pdf.
The Business Year (2015), “Tanzania takes account”, The Business Year, 
www.thebusinessyear.com/tanzania-2015/tanzania-takes-account/review.
The United Republic of Tanzania -- National Audit Office (2013), “Report of the controller and auditor general on the financial 
statements of Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited for the year ended 31 December 2012”, 
www.tanesco.co.tz/index.php/media1/downloads/financial-statements/15-tanesco-audited-accounts-2012.
The United Republic of Tanzania -- National Audit Office (2015),”Report of the controller and auditor general on the consolidated 
financial statements of Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited for the 18-month period ended 30th June 2015”, www.tanesco.
co.tz/index.php/media1/downloads/financial-statements/61-report-of-the-controller-and-auditor-general-on-the-consolidatedfinancial-statements-2014-15.
Thomson Reuters (2015), “Tanzania in talks with China on funding for wind farm”, viewed 25 July 2015, Reuters, 
http://af.reuters.com/article/investingNews/idAFKBN0M81NC20150312.
UK Green Investment Bank (2016), Delivering Value in the UK’s Offshore Wind Market, 
www.greeninvestmentbank.com/funds/offshore-wind-fund/.
UNCTAD (2014), World Investment Report 2014: Investing in the SDGs: an Action Plan, United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development, http://unctad.org/en/PublicationsLibrary/wir2014_en.pdf.
UNECA (2014), Energy Access and Security in Eastern Africa. Status and Enhancement Pathways, United Nations Economic Commission 
for Africa, www.uneca.org/sites/default/files/publications/energy_access_and_security_in_ea_eng_fin_lowres_27dec2013.pdf.
UNFCCC, Information Note: Default Values of Fraction of Non-Renewable Biomass for Least Developed Countries and Small Islands 
Developing States (Version 01.0), EB67 Report Annex 22, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Bonn, Germany, 
http://cdm.unfccc.int. 
World Bank (2016), Private Participation in Infrastructure database, website available at 
http://ppi.worldbank.org/explore/ppi_exploreCountry.aspx?countryId=43.
World Bank (2015a), “Country data Tanzania”, World Bank, Washington D.C, US, http://data.worldbank.org/country/tanzania.
World Bank (2015b), Wind Resource Mapping in Tanzania -- Mesoscale Modeling Report, 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/758141468186533619/Wind-resource-mapping-in-Tanzania-mesoscale-modeling-report.
World Bank (2015c), “Tanzania: solar wind potential could help meet future power generation goals”, 
www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2015/06/09/tanzania-solar-and-wind-potential-could-help-meet-future-power-generation-goals.
World Health Organization, Global Environment Facility and United Nations Development Programme (2009), Transformation Of 
Rural Photovoltaic Market In Tanzania Project, www.climate-eval.org/sites/default/files/evaluations/367%20Transformation%20of%20
Rural%20Photovoltaic%20Market%20in%20Tanzania%20Project.pdf.
Zorita, E. and F.F. Tilya (2002), “Rainfall variability in Northern Tanzania in the March – May season (long rains) and its links to largescale climate forcing”, Climate Research, 20 (1), 31–40, http://doi.org/10.3354/cr020031.