File Name: TZA-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: United Republic of Tanzania
Country Code: TZA
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 6-10 June 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
6 April 2022
Original: English
2205150X (E) 180422
Annual session 2022
6-10 June 2022, New York
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the United Republic of Tanzania 
(2022–2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .......................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships.......………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management .......……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation……………………………………………….………………...…………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for the United Republic of Tanzania (2022–2027) ............................. 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Tanzania attained middle-income country status in 2020 after sustained rapid growth
(averaging 6.7 per cent per year between 2000 and 2019) driven by its natural resources 
(particularly gold), the tourism sector, and public investments in infrastructure 
development. This elevated the country to the 10th largest economy in sub-Saharan Africa, 
with a gross domestic product of $69.24 billion ($1,160 per capita) in 2021. Between 2000 
and 2019, the poverty rate fell from 35.7 per cent to 26.1 per cent (based on the national 
poverty line of $1.35 per person per day); life expectancy rose from 50.8 years to 
65.5 years; and primary school enrolment rate rose from 68.8 per cent to 96.3 per cent, 
with near gender parity. Nevertheless, in 2019, the Human Development Index value of 
Tanzania stood at 0.53, placing the country in the low human development category –
163rd out of 189 countries. The gender development index value was 0.95, and the 
multidimensional poverty rate was 55.4 per cent. Challenges in protecting human rights, 
including socio-economic and women’s rights, were exacerbated by multi-dimensional 
poverty and weak institutions, threatening achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals.
2. The United Nations common country analysis, 2021, attributed the low human 
development outcomes to widening inequality between wealthy urban households – which
enable to benefit from the limited formal employment opportunities generated by rapid
growth – and poorer rural households, particularly those with seven or more children; 
persons with disabilities; and those headed by people with limited or no education or 
women with few productive assets. More female-headed households are in poverty 
(20.3 per cent) than male-headed ones (14 per cent). Of the 13.9 million people living in 
poverty, 81 per cent reside in rural areas, working mainly in crop production, livestock,
and fisheries, where productivity and incomes remain low. The agriculture sector lacks
productivity and is largely disconnected from the sustainable energy sector, which inhibits 
the growth of agricultural-based micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. Rural poverty 
has driven rural-urban migration without a corresponding increase in decent urban 
employment opportunities and basic services. The lack of job creation, and inadequate 
social protection coverage against multi-faceted shocks, mean that 92 per cent of 
Tanzanians exist below the threshold for economic security. The COVID-19 pandemic led 
to an increase in the poverty rate from 26.1 per cent in 2019 to 27.1 per cent in 2020. Youth, 
women, girls and persons with disabilities are among furthest behind in the socio-economic 
strata, with limited access to social protection, health care or quality education, and most 
likely face discrimination, injustice, gender-based violence and food insecurity. 
3. Challenges such as climate change induced by anthropogenic factors, HIV/AIDS and 
malaria, inadequate institutional capacities, low access to technologies, lack of incentives 
for investment in infrastructure, and inability to harness innovation, financing, and data 
generation, remain. They hamper the ability and rights of women, youth, and persons with 
disabilities to influence and benefit from natural resources.
4. Although the country has sustained internal security and peace, and stepped-up efforts 
to curb corruption, progress could be undermined by increasing agitation for voice and 
participation in political processes by those who feel unfairly treated and left behind. 
Momentum in reducing extreme poverty, inequality and exclusion is hampered by limited
capacities in governance institutions for effective public service delivery; inadequate 
citizen participation in governance processes and decision-making; and inadequate access 
for vulnerable groups to justice through laws protecting human rights and the right to peace 
and stability.
5. The United Republic of Tanzania has formulated two national development 
frameworks to shape development transformation: the third national five-year development 
plan, 2021/2022–2025/2026, focused on transforming Tanzania into a semi-industrialized, high middle-income country, with high human development impact, by 2025, and the 
Zanzibar medium-term development strategy, 2021-2027, focused on a ‘blue economy’ for 
inclusive sustainable growth and development. Both frameworks provide the bedrock of 
the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2022-2027, which 
supports Tanzania in realizing its aspirations. 
6. The Cooperation Framework will focus on four outcomes aligned with the Sustainable 
Development Goals covering ‘people’, ‘planet’, ‘prosperity’ and ‘enabling environment’ 
(‘governance’, ‘peace’ and ‘partnerships’). In this country programme document, UNDP 
will contribute to three Development Cooperation Framework outcomes where it has a 
comparative advantage and has invested considerably:
(a) Prosperity. People working in micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and 
small-scale agriculture, especially the most vulnerable, achieve increased sustainable 
productivity and incomes with equitable access to productive resources;
(b) Planet. People, especially the most vulnerable, contribute to and benefit from 
inclusive, gender-responsive management of natural resources, climate change 
resilience, disaster risk reduction and efficient renewable energy;
(c) Enabling environment. People, especially the most vulnerable, participate in and 
benefit from government institutions and systems that promote peace and justice, are
gender-responsive, inclusive, accountable, representative, and compliant with 
international human rights norms and standards;
(d) UNDP will address the ‘People’ outcome of the Cooperation Framework by 
integrating relevant aspects within the ‘prosperity’ outcome. UNDP will invest in its 
broad partnership networks, including the United Nations family, to implement the 
country programme.
7. UNDP will contribute to the priority areas of the Cooperation Framework through its 
integrator role, bringing a transformative approach to development that accelerates socioeconomic and governance results while ensuring national ownership and sustainability. 
UNDP will build on its track record, using innovative integrated solutions to address 
poverty, inequalities, impacts of climate change and governance challenges, including 
through digitization, to enhance public service delivery, address corruption, and promote 
citizen participation in parliamentary and governance affairs; technology transfer, 
particularly in agriculture, renewable energy and water resource management, which have 
helped commercialize smallholder agriculture for women and youth; access to electricity 
and clean water for off-grid communities and community ownership in sustainable land 
and water management; and innovative financing instruments, which have increased 
domestic and foreign direct investments in agribusiness, urban infrastructure and 
ecosystem-level partnerships; and transformative development solutions to the complex 
challenges of the post COVID-19 era. Transformative leadership development for women, 
youth and key governance institutional leaders will be essential in catalysing rapid,
sustainable change.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
8. This programme will focus the three outcome areas aligned to national priorities. They
are informed by the recommendations of the country office outcome evaluations and the 
independent country programme review, 2020, to focus on strategic yet realistic objectives 
for policy and systems changes, grounded in an understanding of the political economy 
and UNDP comparative advantages in innovation, digitization through the accelerator lab, 
and governance. UNDP will leverage the portfolio approach and consultation with 
stakeholders, including development partners, to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in
delivering common results and greater impact through integrated, coherent programming.
9. The country programme theory of change is as follows: If structural transformation 
and economic diversification ensure the creation of sufficient, higher value-added economic activities for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and smallholder farmers 
(particularly those led by youth, women and persons with disabilities); if the most 
vulnerable benefit equitably from inclusive and gender-responsive, low-carbon green 
growth and environmentally sustainable development, and if people, especially the most 
vulnerable, participate in, influence and benefit from government institutions and systems 
that are peaceful, just, representative, gender-responsive, inclusive, accountable and 
compliant with international human rights; then, Tanzania will realize sustainable, resilient
and inclusive socio-economic development, increasing levels of shared prosperity and 
good governance. The theory of change is informed by the change pathways and results of 
the Cooperation Framework and assumptions that for Tanzania to achieve inclusive and 
sustainable development by 2025, political will for social and economic transformation 
will be sustained; policy and structural reforms for pro-poor and green development 
targeting women, youth, and other vulnerable groups will be implemented; and the 
democratic space will be expanded to allow the active participation of diverse groups.
10. Through its integrator role, UNDP will support Cooperation Framework priorities by 
investing in area-based and joint programming to address inequality, poverty, and 
environment/climate change. In collaboration with the United Nations Capital 
Development Fund (UNCDF) and the World Tourism Organization, UNDP will invest in 
key Sustainable Development Goals accelerators, including innovative financing; data 
analytics; innovation; public service delivery transformation and development 
effectiveness; COVID-19 socio-economic recovery; and human rights-based approaches
that emphasize gender equality and leave no one behind. Informed by an evaluation from 
the International Centre for Public Enterprises, UNDP will apply an ecosystem engagement 
approach to deepen programme reach and impact. 
Prosperity: inclusive growth for sustainable development 
11. To foster structural economic transformation, UNDP, in partnership with the 
International Trade Centre, UN-Women and UNOPS, will support government capacity to 
deliver transformative, gender-responsive, inclusive, and evidence-based integrated 
sectoral policies and regulations, centred on the needs of micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises, start-ups and smallholder farmers, particularly those led by youth, women and 
persons with disabilities. Support will enable policies and regulations that attract capital 
and develop new markets leveraging the opportunities of the African Continental Free 
Trade Area; facilitate technology transfer through South-South and triangular cooperation;
and incentivize sustainability and growth of new micro, small and medium-sized 
enterprises, innovation ventures, and smallholder agricultural enterprises. These will be 
delivered through business development service providers and relevant partners. Digital 
solutions catalytic to the business environment in Tanzania will be prioritized. Support will 
leverage UNDP leadership in the innovation ecosystem and methodologies of the 
accelerator lab.
12. In partnership with UNCDF, the International Labour Organization and the 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, UNDP will invest in strengthening
the resilience of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, smallholder farmers, 
communities, women, and youth, to shocks and impacts of pandemics and other disasters. 
Through the collection of credible conventional, community-generated and ‘big data’, 
strong analytics and visualization, opportunities will be identified to strengthen the 
resilience and recovery of priority sectors and value chains, especially those affected by 
COVID-19, and enable the tourism, ‘blue economy’, and horticulture sectors to access new 
and diverse markets, adopt innovative digital tools, and access financial services –
including insurance – for growth, continuity, and risk mitigation.
13. Responding to the challenges of rapid urbanization, UNDP, in partnership with UNHabitat and UNCDF, will strengthen the capacities of selected regions, local governments 
and secondary cities to implement regional investment guides and city and town master plans. Leveraging the Sustainable Development Goals investor map and Smart Green 
Cities, city and town authorities and the private sector will be supported in generating
investable urban Sustainable Development Goals impact projects; accessing local and 
foreign direct investment; and strengthening integrated urban planning, governance, land 
management and urban financing mechanisms. UNDP will support development financing 
for the third national five-year development plan and the Zanzibar medium-term 
development strategy, through implementation of the integrated national financing 
framework.
14. As part of the United Nations team on HIV/AIDS, UNDP will advocate for policies 
addressing stigma, discrimination and access to services for vulnerable populations, 
especially women and youth. Support will include efficient delivery of gender-sensitive 
AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria services. UNDP support to social protection will enable 
poor women, youth and persons with disabilities to access risk insurance. UNDP will 
enable strengthening of the national pharmaceutical system to foster an efficient, 
accountable supply chain that ensures uninterrupted availability of health commodities, 
including in times of pandemics.
Planet: environmental sustainability, climate change and resilience
15. UNDP will support natural resource management and biodiversity conservation by 
addressing drivers of natural resource degradation while building resilience to climate
change, focusing on: resilience of forest biodiversity in Tanzania nature forest reserves;
water resources management; implementation of the biodiversity finance plan. support 
communities in implementing community-based biodiversity interventions and provide
institutional support to law enforcement in combating poaching and illegal wildlife trade.
16. UNDP will support development and implementation of the national adaptation plan, 
mainstreaming climate change planning in the government budget and planning 
machinery. UNDP will strengthen the capacity of core institutions to effectively manage 
adaptation plan; support the establishment of inter-ministerial and inter-agency climate 
change adaptation coordination mechanisms for innovative climate change resilience 
financing solutions; and provide oversight for the development and implementation of the 
nationally determined contributions of Tanzania, plus a robust set of vulnerability 
assessments across eight key sectors. UNDP will work with key partners to realize the 
carbon emission reduction targets stipulated in the nationally determined contributions and 
strengthen the capacity of the Vice President’s Office to coordinate implementation. UNDP 
will support parliamentary committees, local government authorities and civil society 
organizations to promote women’s and youth access to land and other natural resources.
17. UNDP will support implementation of the ‘blue economy’ programme, focusing on
regulatory frameworks; marine spatial planning for investment promotion in the sector; 
establishment of a blue economy investment facility; and strengthening of government
coordination capacities. 
18. In collaboration with United Nations organizations and the European Union, UNDP 
will promote access to efficient renewable energy through: mapping and feasibility of 
potential solar sites to accelerate access by off-grid communities, with the Ministry of 
Energy and the Rural Energy Agency; promoting the use of energy-efficient technologies; 
and developing energy performance standards and sustainable procurement of energyefficient infrastructure and equipment to enhance the service-delivery capacity of the 
Tanzania Electric Supply Company Limited and the Rural Energy Agency. UNDP will 
promote access to and use of mini-grids supporting agriculture, access to drinking water, 
irrigation and agro-processing.Enabling environment: governance and sustaining peace
19. UNDP will support policies and systems improving the delivery of democratic 
dividends to citizens while enabling them to participate in public policymaking and holding 
institutions accountable at national and local levels. In collaboration with UN-Women, 
UNDP will offer institutional, policy and capacity-development support to parliamentary 
institutions – the National Assembly and the Zanzibar House of Representatives – to ensure 
effective legislative and gender-responsive budget review and oversight, with public 
participation. UNDP will work with partners to support the electoral management bodies
(EMBs) to strengthen the enabling environment for inclusive and credible electoral 
process in Tanzania. UNDP will enable citizens’ groups, including women’s and youth 
groups, media, and research and academic institutions, to influence the work of electoral 
and parliamentary institutions through capacity-building and engagement with EMBs and 
parliamentarians. 
20. The United Republic of Tanzania Development Visions expect efficient, competent 
and knowledgeable public servants who provide digitized public services including ethical 
conduct and accountability. In partnership with presidents’ offices (mainland and 
Zanzibar), the Association of Local Government Authorities, civil society organizations,
the private sector, United Nations organizations and other partners, UNDP will strengthen 
the capacities of institutions to accelerate service delivery and support citizen engagement 
by monitoring services to improve quality and inform policies. 
21. UNDP will support strengthening transparency and accountability by enabling the 
President’s Office – Division on Good Governance to develop and implement the fourth 
national anti-corruption strategy and action plan. UNDP will implement the anti-corruption 
global project for peaceful and inclusive societies.
22. UNDP will support to improve equitable, timely access to justice and human rights 
protection, especially for the most vulnerable. In collaboration with the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and Commission for Human Rights and 
Good Governance, UNDP will strengthen access to justice, rule of law, and application of 
human rights by strengthening the ability and accountability of justice institutions in 
providing services. Gender equality and youth and women’s empowerment will be 
mainstreamed, focusing on children, persons with disabilities, people living with HIV, the 
elderly, refugees and immigrants.
23. To address challenges related to transnational organized crime and political instability 
in neighbouring countries, UNDP, with the United Nations Children’s Fund and the 
International Organization for Migration, will strengthen the capacity of institutions to 
prevent violence and combat terrorism and crime. UNDP will act as an interlocutor 
between the Government and donor agencies to engage in security support. 
24. UNDP will collaborate with the Resident Coordinator’s office in supporting
implementation of the national Sustainable Development Goals coordination framework to 
enable their alignment with the Goals; and lead ministries in establishing mechanisms for 
financing and reporting on the third national five-year development plan and the Zanzibar 
medium-term development strategy. The common country analysis, 2021, and 
observations on the dilemmas experienced around data collection, analysis and use for 
decision-making and monitoring the Sustainable Development Goals, will be addressed in 
collaboration with other United Nations organizations, the World Bank, Sweden and 
Switzerland, focusing on data and analytics to strengthen statistical systems for planning 
and reporting, with attention to vulnerable and excluded groups in national data sets. The 
focus will be on supporting routine data, surveys and compilation of national human 
development reports and multi-dimensional poverty indices. 
25. UNDP will work with partners, regions and the Ministry of Finance to implement the 
local economic development framework, support the development and implementation of a strategic framework for economic diplomacy, and strengthen and expand cooperation and 
participation in regional and international development. UNDP will develop institutional 
capacity for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to implement the Tanzania foreign policy,
deepening economic diplomacy for international cooperation, trade and investment, and 
diversifying financing for national development.
26. With the Ministry of Constitution and Legal Affairs, UNDP will co-create a 
programme to manage natural wealth by promoting transparent, accountable and inclusive 
governance systems to harness potential and contribute to inclusive socio-economic 
transformation. Strengthened governance systems will ensure a ‘win-win’ situation for 
state and non-state actors, including the private sector, and will benefit those left behind.
III. Programme and risk management
27. During implementation of the programme, local elections will be held in 2024 and 
general elections in 2025. Tanzania faces election-related challenges that affect public 
opinion, relationships with development partners, and decision-making processes in the 
public sector that could impede programme implementation. Election crises in Zanzibar in 
2010 and 2015 resulted in the suspension of donor support for the House of 
Representatives, hampering the 2016-2021 programme. There are tendencies to shift to 
short-term election-oriented priorities rather than the longer-term development agenda of
the Government. UNDP will manage this risk by scanning the operating environment 
through early-warning systems and proactive engagement with the Government,
development partners, the country team and the Resident Coordinator. 
28. The impact of COVID-19 and natural disasters could shift resource allocation 
priorities from governance and economic sectors towards health, social and humanitarian 
sectors. Combined with declining official development assistance, this might affect the
ability of UNDP to meet its commitments and priority results. UNDP will mitigate those
risks by positioning itself with trusted development partners, strengthening partnerships
with international financial institutions, and investing in South-South cooperation. UNDP 
will assess operational and fraud risks and act in accordance with anti-fraud policies.
29. Development cooperation has shifted from funding to financing and is centred on trade 
and investment. To address any shortfalls in aid flows from this change, UNDP will explore 
alternative sources of financing through private sector and non-traditional donors. UNDP 
will design and implement programmes that embrace a business solutions approach to 
accessing financing from international markets and private investors, supporting a pipeline 
of investor-ready projects. UNDP will use its convening power to galvanize partnerships 
with bilateral and multilateral institutions.
30. UNDP social and environmental safeguards and accountability mechanisms will be 
utilized as mitigating tools, and the country office will commission quality assessments of 
its programme and projects, during inception and implementation, to ensure that risks are 
identified and a management plan instituted.
31. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities 
of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country 
programmes is prescribed in the programme and operations policies and procedures and 
the internal control framework.
32. The programme will be nationally executed. Direct execution will be used as needed 
to enable response to force majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be 
used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial 
risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness 
will be charged to the concerned projects.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
33. Due to the increasing demand for gender-responsive data and evidence-based analysis
and joint assessment and analysis by the Government and partners, UNDP, in collaboration 
with United Nations organizations, the Resident Coordinator’s Office, the World Bank the 
private sector and civil society organizations, will support the Government in strengthening
Sustainable Development Goals coordination platforms, monitoring and evaluation 
systems for the third national five-year development plan and the Zanzibar medium-term 
development strategy. The results indicators of the country programme are informed by the 
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework, and national development strategies.
34. Together with United Nations entities, civil society organizations and national 
statistical offices, UNDP will invest in baseline studies and data analytics to close data 
gaps and support unconventional sources of data through perception surveys and ‘big data’
initiatives, using real-time data collection from national statistical offices. This will 
improve the overall statistics landscape and enable evidence-based policies, planning, and 
reporting on progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals. Attention will be paid 
to quality monitoring and knowledge management through collection of gender-responsive 
data, data quality assessments, feeding findings into project management decision-making, 
and training for programme staff, partner organizations and national counterparts. 
35. The evaluation plan will include all three outcomes and all projects that meet the 
corporate evaluation threshold. The plan will be reviewed and updated during the 
programme cycle. UNDP will participate in Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework evaluations as required. Evaluations will be used for learning and decisionmaking, strategic planning, programme design, implementation, and modifications
contributing to UNDP relevance on the ground. The country office will mainstream gender 
and ensure adequate resources allocation (above a 15 per cent threshold) in each project,
and 7 per cent of the programme budget to implement the monitoring and evaluation plan. 
Strengthen learning by leveraging accelerator lab programme.
36. The results, lessons and achievements of ensuring development partners’ visibility,
UNDP will support implementation of the joint United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework communication and advocacy initiative, and will strengthen 
partnerships with media outlets, government communications departments, and the 
United Nations Communications Group, to supplement its advocacy efforts on key 
development issues. Communications budgets will be integrated into programmes and 
projects.Annex. Results and resources framework for the United Republic of Tanzania (2022-2027)
NATIONAL GOAL: An inclusive and competitive economy; deepening industrialization and service provision; investment and trade promotion; human development; and skills development
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 1. People in the United Republic of Tanzania working in micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and small-scale agriculture, especially 
the most vulnerable, achieve increased, more sustainable productivity and incomes, with more equitable access to productive resources.
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Growth and development are inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded.
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), baselines 
and target(s)
Data source and frequency of data 
collection and responsibilities Indicative country programme outputs Major partners partnerships frameworks
Estimated cost by outcome 
(in thousands of dollars)
Proportion of small-scale 
manufacturing industries in total 
manufacturing industry value 
added
Baseline (2021): 3%
Target (2027): 5%
Surveys, Bank of Tanzania
Ministry of Industry and Trade 
(MIT); annual 
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS)
surveys and reports; annual
Programme reports, relevant 
ministry reports
Frequency: annual
Ministry of Health reports
NBS surveys 
Frequency: annual
Output 1.1. Ministries, departments, agencies (MDAs) and 
local government authorities (LGAs) have enhanced 
technical capacity to develop transformative, gendersensitive, evidence-based policies and regulatory 
frameworks that address the needs of micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) and smallholder 
farmers.
Indicators
1.1.1. Number of enabling policies, regulations strategies 
and plans, inclusive/gender-responsive, developed and 
implemented to improve the enabling environment for 
MSMEs and smallholder farmers (SHFs)
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2027): 5 developed and 3 implemented
1.1.2. Number of institutions developing and implementing 
evidence-based policies that facilitate MSMEs and SHFs
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2027): 10 
Local governments, Prime 
Minister’s Officer, MIT, 
Ministry of Agriculture, 
Institute of Rural 
Development Planning, 
Tanzania Private Sector 
Foundation (TPSF), 
Tanzania Horticultural 
Association
Tanzania Association of 
Tour Operators
Swedish International 
Development Cooperation 
Agency
United Kingdom – Foreign, 
Commonwealth and
Development Office
European Union
Regular: $9,621 
Other: $20,690 
Unemployment rate by sex age 
and area
Baseline (2021): To be 
determined (TBD)
Target (2027): 
Output 1.2. Relevant institutions have enhanced capacities 
to provide gender-responsive market-oriented programmes, 
products and services to MSMEs and smallholder farmers
Indicators
1.2.1. Number of MSMEs and smallholder farmers 
accessing financial and non-financial services, 
disaggregated by sex
Baseline (2021): 2597 (F–1,250, M–1,347)
Target (2027): 10,000 (F–6,000, M–4,000)
1.2.2. Number of gender-responsive investment-ready 
projects (by sector) that suit the needs of MSMEs and 
smallholder farmers prepared and operationalized 
Baseline (2021): 10
Target (2027): 25
Proportion of landscape under 
productive and sustainable 
agriculture
Output 1.3. Smallholder farmers have strengthened 
capacities to adopt innovative, climate resilient practices for 
Sokoine University of 
AgricultureBaseline (2021): TBD
Target (2027): 5% annually over 
the baseline
increased, sustainable productivity and commercialization 
of agricultural commodities
Indicators
1.3.1. Number of smallholder farmers, disaggregated by sex 
and age, supported to adopt innovative solutions 
Baseline (2021): 1,400 (F722, M678)
Target (2027): 14,000 (F7280, M6720)
Institute of Rural 
Development Planning
LGAs
Small industries 
Development Organization
Vocational Education and 
Training Authority
Tanzania Fisheries 
Coverage of essential health Research Institute
services 
Baseline (2021): 45%
Target (2027): 60%
Output 1.4. Service delivery capacities of key stakeholders 
increased to effectively efficiently deliver and monitor 
quality human rights-based, gender-responsive, innovative, 
integrated, basic education, reproductive, maternal, 
newborn, child and adolescent health, AIDS, tuberculosis,
malaria, nutrition and protection services
Indicators
1.5.1. No. of facilities in selected locations that meet 
criteria in national guidelines related to quality service 
provision
Baseline (2021): 42%
Target (2027): 57% 
NATIONAL GOAL: Biodiversity conservation and strengthening national capacity to address climate change adaptation and mitigation measures
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 2. People in the United Republic of Tanzania, especially the most vulnerable, contribute to and benefit from more inclusive and genderresponsive management of natural resources, climate change resilience, disaster risk reduction and increased use of efficient renewable energy.
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Countries are able to reduce the likelihood of conflict and reduce risk of natural disasters, including from climate change.
Amount of financial flows in 
support of renewable energy 
production, including in hybrid 
systems
Baseline (2021): $1,025546,142
Target (2027): $1,128,100,756 
Programme reports; ministry 
reports, outcome and project 
evaluation reports
Frequency: biannual and annual
Output 2.1. MDAs and LGAs have enhanced capacity to 
formulate, coordinate and monitor policies, regulations, 
strategies and plans for improved gender-responsive and 
inclusive management of natural resources, climate change 
resilience (CCR) and disaster risk reduction (DRR), and 
access to efficient renewable energy
Indicators
2.1.1. No. of key institutions capacitated to manage 
adaptation planning and actions
Baseline (2021): 7
Target (2027): 15
2.1.2. Proportion of local communities supported to adopt 
alternative livelihood activities 
Baseline (2021): 20%
Target (2027): 45%
Ministry of Blue 
Economy
First Vice President’s 
Office 
Ministry of Education 
Vice President’s Office
Ministry of Finance and 
Planning (MOFP)
Norway 
Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Tourism
President’s Office –
Regional Administration 
and Local Government
UNDP
United Nations 
Environment Programme
United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime
African Wildlife 
Foundation
Regular: $12,051 
Other: $26,700
Number of integrated genderresponsive digital data systems in 
place for inclusive natural 
resources management, CCR, 
DRR and efficient renewable 
energy
Programme reports, ministry 
reports, outcome and project 
evaluation reports
Frequency: biannual and annual
Output 2.2. MDAs and LGAs have increased capacity to 
generate, analyse and use disaggregated data for improved 
inclusive and gender responsive results-based management 
and reporting on natural resources management CCR, DRR
and use of efficient renewable energyBaseline (2021): 0 
Target (2027): 4, including: 
1 renewable energy, 1 natural 
resources management (NRM); 
1 CCR, and 1 DRR
Indicators
2.2.1. National information and knowledge management 
system established and made easily accessible
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2027): 4 
2.2.2. Integrated system for biodiversity data management in 
place
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2027): 2
Pams Foundation,
German Agency for 
International Cooperation
Tanzania National Parks 
Authority
Tanzania Wildlife 
Research Institute
Ngorongoro 
Conservation Area 
Authority
Global Environment 
Facility/Global Climate 
Fund
United States Department 
of State
World Wildlife Fund
United States Agency for 
International 
Development
Proportion of important sites for 
terrestrial and freshwater 
biodiversity that are covered by 
protected areas, by ecosystem type
Baseline (2021): 38.5% 
Target (2027): 45% 
Programme reports, ministry 
reports, outcome and project 
evaluation reports
Frequency: biannual and annual
Output 2.3. MDA and LGA service delivery systems 
capacity increased for efficient and effective natural 
resources management, climate change resilience, disaster 
risk reduction, access to and use of efficient renewable 
energy by women, persons with disabilities, youth and other 
vulnerable groups
Indicators:
2.3.1. No. of relevant MDAs and LGAs supported with plans 
and strategies for enhanced resilience to climate change, 
access to and use of efficient renewable energy by women, 
persons with disabilities, youth and other vulnerable groups
Baseline (2021): 6
Target (2027): 28
2.3.2. No. of public-private-community partnerships 
facilitated
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2027): 3
Proportion of households with 
access to renewable energy 
technology
Baseline (2021): 78.4% 
Target (2027): 96% 
Output 2.4. MDAs and LGAs have increased capacity to 
develop incentives and infrastructure to harness innovation, 
attract partnerships and encourage investments in public 
goods and gender-responsive service delivery related to 
natural resource management, CCR, DRR, and access to and 
use of efficient renewable energy by women, persons with 
disabilities, youth.
Indicators
2.4.1. No. of MDAs and LGAs supported to attract 
innovation and partnership in renewable energy, NRM and 
climate change
Baseline (2021): 12
Target (2027): 35
2.4.2. No. of financing mechanisms on renewable energy 
technology 
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 20NATIONAL GOAL: Good governance, rule of law
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 3. People in the United Republic of Tanzania, especially the most vulnerable, participate in and benefit from government institutions and systems that 
promote peace and justice, are gender responsive, inclusive, accountable, representative, and compliant with international human rights norms and standards.
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance.
Proportion of positions (by sex 
age, persons with disabilities and 
population groups) in public 
institutions (national and local 
legislatures, public service, and 
judiciary) compared to national 
distributions
National Assembly
Baseline (2021)
Total MPs: 392 
Ratio: 1:152,383
Male ratio: 1:120,368
Female ratio: 1:207,522
Target (2027)
National Assembly:
Ratio: 1:152,383
Male:1:143,515
Female: 1:162,408
Zanzibar House of 
Representatives:
Baseline: 
Total MPs: 82 
Ratio: 1:15,897
Male: 1:11,679
Female: 1:24,032
Target
Ratio: 1:15,897
Male: 1:12,871
Female: 1:20,391
Proportion of the population 
satisfied with their last 
experience of public services, 
disaggregated by sex, age, 
disability status
Baseline: 42.8%
Target: 47.8%
Male: 40%
Female: 60%
Disability: 30%
Programme reports, President’s 
Office – Public Service 
Management; leadership 
development reports, project 
reports; MDA reports; President’s 
Office – Constitution, Legal 
Affairs, Public Service and Good 
Governance (POCLAPS-GG);
LGAs; annual
Output 3.1. Key governance institutions (MDAs, LGAs, 
electoral management bodies (s) and legislative bodies) 
effectively manage democratic processes and deliver 
transparent, inclusive and accountable public services. 
Indicators
3.1.1. % of public leaders (disaggregated by sex) in public 
service equipped with transformative leadership 
knowledge 
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 40% (30% F; 70% M)
3.1.2. No. of MDAs, LGAs, EMBs and legislative bodies 
supported to strengthen effective, transparent, 
inclusive, accountable democratic representation and
public service delivery
Baseline (2021): 4 MDAs, 5 LGAs, 0 EMBs 
and 1 legislative body
Target (2026): 5 MDAs, 8 LGAs, 4 EMBs and 
2 legislative bodies
3.1.3. No. of MDAs and LGAs with functional public 
service delivery charters. 
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2026): 320 MDAs and LGAs in 
mainland and Zanzibar
3.1.4. No. of civil society organizations (CSOs) facilitated 
to participate in governance processes,
disaggregated by focus on women and youth 
Baseline (2021): 3 (women), 1 (youth)
Target (2026): 8 (women), 4 (youth) 
Ministry of Home Affairs
President’s Office – Public 
Service and Good 
Governance
Constitution
Legal Affairs
Prevention and Combating 
of Corruption Bureau, 
Zanzibar Anti-corruption 
and Economic Crimes 
Authority
National Assembly 
Zanzibar House of 
Representatives
Regular: $11,091 
Other: $29,266.825
Proportion of sustainable 
development indicators 
produced at national level with 
fll ditih
Ministry of Finance and Planning
(MOFP), NBS, Office of the Chief 
Government Statistician – Zanzibar
Output 3.2. Government, non-state actors, researchers and
academia have enhanced capacities to produce, manage, 
coordinate and use fully disaggregated data.
MOFP 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs
East African Community
NBSrelevant to the target, in 
accordance with fundamental 
principles of official statistics
Baseline (2019): 25%
Target (2027): 60%
(OCGS), PORGLA, National 
Council of NGOs; TPSF; annual
Indicators
3.2.1. No. of government coordination mechanisms 
governing the production of multi-level 
disaggregated data established or strengthened 
Baseline (2019): 2 – Tanzania Human 
Development Report (HDR) 2018 and 
Voluntary National Review (VNR)
Target (2027): 4 – Two Tanzania HDRs, one 
Zanzibar HDR and one VNR in 2022-2023
3.2.2. No. of data producers and users with strengthened 
capacities in collection, analysis, dissemination and 
use of disaggregated data
Baseline: 4 categories – NBS, OCGS, MDAs, 
LGAs
Target: 5: CSOs, NGOs, private sector, LGAs, 
research academia
3.2.3. No of monographs or reports produced using 
disaggregated data (by sex, age, disability status,
geographical location) from the 2022 census.
Baseline (2021): 1 Monograph on disability
Target (2026): 1 Monograph on action dialogue 
– policy paper 
OCGS
Proportion of national budget 
funded by domestically 
generated resources
Baseline (2021)
Domestic revenue: 72% 
Domestic loans: 14% 
Target (2027)
Domestic revenue: 75% 
Domestic loans: 11%
MOFP, LGAs; annual Output 3.3. Government capacities improved to undertake 
balanced, inclusive, gender-responsive and transparent 
planning, budgeting, and financing (including increased 
domestic resource mobilization, alternative and innovative 
financing).
Indicators
3.3.1. No. of government-supported gender-responsive 
planning and investment frameworks 
Baseline (2021): 27 – 2 national development 
plans – the third national five-year development 
plan, the Zanzibar medium-term development 
strategy, and 25 regional investment guides
Target (year): 150 (75 Local Economic 
Development frameworks and 75 special
purpose vehicles in LGAs)
3.3.2. No. of innovative financing mechanisms supported
Baseline (2021): 2 – Mechanisms: publicprivate partnerships, biodiversity financing
Target (2026): 4 – Blue and green bonds,
public-private and community partnerships, 
LGA-level special-purpose vehicles
MOFP
LGAs
Project reports, MDAs
Ministry of Constitution and Legal 
Affairs (MOCLA), annual
Output 3. Justice and rule-of-law institutions have 
strengthened capacities to review, develop and implement 
access to justice and rule-of-law systems to protect human 
MOCLA
TPFrights for all, especially the most vulnerable groups, and 
are sensitive to gender, disability, and age.
Indicators
3.4.1. No. of personnel capacitated to resolve legal 
disputes
Baseline (2021):395 (F. 151, M. 244)
Target (2027):1000 (F. 500, M. 500)
3.4.2. No. of policy and legal frameworks 
developed/revised 
Baseline (2021): 6
Target (2027):10
3.4.3. No. of stakeholders accessing legal aid services
Baseline (2021): 1,500,000 (F. 783,500, 
M. 716,500
Target (2027): 4,000,000 (F. 2,500,000, 
M. 1,500,000)
Commission for Human 
Rights and Good 
Governance (CHRAGG)
Judiciary
Non-state actors 
Extent to which institutions are 
in place to safeguard human 
rights and effectively deliver 
humanitarian protection, peace, 
safety, and stability 
1. Institutions in place but do not 
fully safeguard human rights and 
deliver humanitarian protection; 
2. Institutions in place but 
selectively safeguard human 
rights and humanitarian 
protection; 
3. Institutions in place and 
safeguard human rights and 
humanitarian protection 
Baseline (2021): 2
Target (2025): 3
Community trust survey, project 
reports; UNDP, National 
Counterterrorism Centre, TPF;
annual
Output 3.5. Government capacities enhanced to fulfil 
relevant international conventions and African regional 
agreements, contribute to international peacebuilding, 
support humanitarian-development processes, uphold 
national security, and formalize cross-border cooperation 
and migration to ensure peace, safety, and stability for all
Indicators
3.5.1. % of targeted communities with increased trust and 
confidence in law enforcement agencies 
Baseline (2021): 55% 
Target (2027): 60% 
3.5.2. No. of CSOs supported that promote women’s and 
youth participation in peacebuilding
Baseline (2021): 0
Target (2027): 4
3.5.3 No. of government initiatives on cross-border
cooperation supported 
Baseline (2021): 1
Target (2027): 2
MOCLA
NPS
POCLAPS-GG
TPF
Law reform and review 
commissions
CHRAGG
Director of Public 
Prosecution
Attorney General
Judiciary
LGAs
Ministry of Home Affairs
Law schools
Non-state actors 