File Name: UGA-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Uganda
Country Code: UGA
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 August – 4 September 2020
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2020
Original: English
2008921X (E) 280720
Second regular session 2020
31 August – 4 September 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Uganda (2021-2025)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework …………… 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships ………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management …………………………………………….…………………… 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
Annex
Results and resources framework for Uganda (2021-2025)………………………………………… 8I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Cooperation
Framework
1. Uganda has made impressive gains in its socio-economic transformation, maintaining its 
ambition to become a modern, prosperous society as espoused by Vision 2040 and its 
commitment to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Its gross domestic product (GDP)
doubled over the last 10 years, from $17.2 billion in 2010 to $34.4 billion in 2019. Life expectancy 
increased from 54.5 years in 2012 to 64 years in 2017. Literacy rates jumped from 70 to 
74 per cent between 2012-2013 and 2016-2017. These achievements were underpinned by sound 
monetary and fiscal policies, sustained peace and security, and investment in fundamentals 
established in the Second National Development Plan (‘NDP-II’, 2016-2020). Uganda is on 
course to consolidate the gains made through implementation of ‘NDP-III’, 2021-2025).
2. The country has vast opportunities that can benefit all Ugandans, especially the young and 
dynamic population – over 80 per cent under the age of 35. The African Continental Free Trade 
Area can potentially reposition the industrialization strategy of the country and organize an agile 
business ecosystem across high-value sectors such as agriculture, tourism and mineral 
development. If well leveraged, the conducive climate could position Uganda as a food basket on
the continent. Its geo-positioning within the Great Lakes region offers an opportunity to address 
transboundary challenges related to trade, natural resources management, peace and security. The 
local economic development framework positions Uganda to advance inclusive sustainable 
development.
3. The NDP-III focus on inclusive growth, transformational governance, natural resources and 
the environment integrates the Sustainable Development Goals and uniquely positions UNDP as 
a key partner to support the transformational agenda. UNDP consultative support to the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025, process included: 
strengthening the strategic engagement of the United Nations development system in the 
formulation of NDP-III and leadership in several thematic areas of the common country 
assessment. Development of the Cooperation Framework, coordinated by the Office of the 
United Nations Resident Coordinator, was technically and financially supported by UNDP. The 
Framework plans to deliver on three strategic areas: (a) Transformative and inclusive 
governance; (b) Shared prosperity in a healthy environment); and (c) Human well-being and 
resilience.
4. While Uganda is on course to achieving its long-term vision, several structural development 
challenges persist, coupled with the unprecedented long-term impact of COVID-19. Within the 
Cooperation Framework, in collaboration with the wider United Nations family and partners, 
UNDP is strategically positioned to support the Government in addressing three key challenges:
5. Governance issues could hamper development gains. While there has been progress in 
governance, including improved performance of justice, law and order institutions, public finance 
management reforms, sector coordination, and peace and security, critical challenges remain. 
These include: slow progress in programme implementation as a result of public institutions 
operating in silos; weaknesses in institutional coordination that could hamper an efficient all-ofgovernment response to crises; delay in adopting e-governance to facilitate private-sector 
development and foster transparency, integrity, accountability, and dispensation of justice; gaps
in enforcement of policies and laws; deficiencies in public service delivery; and gaps in 
empowering local governments to drive local economic development effectively.
6. Despite the recognition of the transformative role of information communications and 
technology, uptake of e-governance has been slow, leading to limited infusion in public service 
and private-sector business models. However, opportunities exist that could inspire
transformative and inclusive governance. The NDP-III emphasizes the need to harness digital 
solutions to build dynamic e-governance and e-commerce platforms, and the criticality of 
disaster-resilience capacity at all levels.7. The slow pace of structural transformation. The slow progress of high-impact sectors such 
as agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism, coupled with weak value chains, has hindered gains 
in productivity, job creation, poverty reduction and structural change. This has resulted in jobless
growth: more than 90 per cent of young people aged 18 to 30 are engaged in informal 
employment, with men and women equally affected. The recent rise in poverty is accompanied 
by growing income inequality, annualized at 0.3 per cent – disproportionately higher in the 
northern and eastern regions – implying wider exclusion, especially of vulnerable people, from 
human development gains. In 2019, the Human Development Index ranking of Uganda fell by 
almost 27 per cent due to inequality. The COVID-19 pandemic is expected to result in a decline 
in growth from the projected 6.3 per cent to between 4.6 and 5.1 per cent in 2019-2020, and the 
descent into poverty of at least 2.6 million people.
8. Deterioration of the ecosystem in pursuit of economic development. Ecosystem degradation 
arising, in part, from unsustainable agricultural practices; increased demand for fuel by 
94 per cent of households, endangered forest cover; and rapid urbanization –5.2 per cent annually
– increased pressure on natural resources such as urban wetlands. Uganda is the 14th-mostvulnerable country in the world, and the 49th
-least-ready to adapt to climate change, with about 
7 and 40 per cent, respectively, of land highly or moderately susceptible to floods and drought, 
mainly in the eastern and northern regions. Unsustainable ecosystem management could severely
affect the poor, especially women, whose activities depend largely on nature. 
9. UNDP has comparative advantages to complement United Nations development system
efforts. First, its value proposition is anchored in its mandate as a lead development agency 
globally, through signature and integrated development solutions, and its repositioned offer for 
Africa. Second, UNDP builds on experience and development results achieved during the 
previous country programme, 2016-2020, notably: strong leadership in wetlands and forest-cover 
restoration; reawakened discourse on structural transformation through industrialization; and 
strengthened governance systems. Third, UNDP leverages its Global Policy Network to provide 
specialist advice. Fourth, UNDP will continue to be the support platform for mainstreaming 
acceleration and policy on the Sustainable Development Goals. Within the Cooperation 
Framework, UNDP is the lead organization for two of the five outcomes, delivering in the 
governance and natural resources spaces.
10. Building on the recommendations of the independent country programme evaluation, the 
programme will emphasize the implementation of more strategic programmes, focusing on a few 
areas to achieve impact at scale; and more downstream engagement to strengthen local-level 
delivery. This will leverage the momentum and visibility created in areas of combined upstream 
and downstream delivery of the environment and natural resources portfolio, enhanced 
government development planning, Sustainable Development Goals integration, and support to 
resilience-building.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
11. The country programme, developed through a consultative process in alignment with NDPIII, the Cooperation Framework, the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, and the Goals, will 
contribute to three interlinked and mutually reinforcing development results: transformational 
and inclusive governance; inclusive and sustainable growth; and sustainable management of 
natural resources and resilient development. These will be achieved through strengthening the 
governance system in the public and private sectors as a backbone for delivery; enhancing social 
protection; transformation of nature-based solutions, innovation, inclusive business models and
technology into decent jobs, industrialization, economic opportunities and improved livelihoods; 
improving adaptation to climate change and disaster risks; and ensuring sustainable access to 
energy services.
12. UNDP will adopt approaches that integrate gender equality into its programming to ensure
sustainable impact and meet the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. Partnerships will be established with international financial 
institutions and multilateral and bilateral agencies to unlock domestic public and private capital 
to transform legal, policy and social norms, and creating a sustainable impact on women’s 
economic, social and political empowerment. 
13. UNDP will deliver on its integrator role within the United Nations development system by: 
(a) providing integrated services and platforms to support achievement of the Goals; 
(b) supporting the development of an integrated data ecosystem; (c) mobilizing innovative
financing for the Goals, including through the Integrated National Financing Framework; (d) cocreating innovative development pathways through the Accelerator Lab; (e) promoting digital 
solutions; (f) transferring knowledge and technology through South-South and triangular 
cooperation; (g) brokering partnerships with non-state actors; and (h) providing analytical and 
programming support during and post-COVID-19 recovery and resilience-building.
Transformational and inclusive governance 
14. As a backbone for delivery on all priorities, UNDP will strengthen the governance 
infrastructure in the public and private sectors and in sectors whose functions are catalytic to the 
national development agenda. Emphasis will be on advancing public-sector reforms to strengthen 
institutional coherence, creating linkages to boost private-sector competitiveness; and building 
and institutionalizing e-governance systems in the public sector for effective coordination, 
transparency and accountability at national and local levels. Attention will be paid to e-justice 
systems to integrate digital solutions in the providing high-quality justice services. UNDP will 
strengthen institutional coordination to enhance crisis management and effective implementation 
of the Goals.
15. The previous programme will be leveraged to improve the quality of democracy by 
supporting the electoral cycle for transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections, and promoting 
electoral reforms in the post-election period. The functions of Parliament and the judiciary will 
be strengthened in accountability and civic engagement, with national dialogue processes to foster 
positive values, mind-set change, and the effective participation of youth and women. 
16. The national infrastructure for peace, security, alternative conflict resolution and 
management will be strengthened, including with traditional, cultural and religious leaders and 
the creative industry, in part through promotion of dialogue. Values-based approaches to peace 
and development, resilience-building and Goals implementation will be promoted. Cross-border 
governance challenges, including prevention of violent extremism, natural resource conflict, and
migration, will be addressed through transboundary programming, in partnership with the 
United Nations development system, development partners and civil society organizations.
17. UNDP will partner with relevant United Nations organizations to foster democracy, peace, 
justice, security, resilience-building, gender equality and women’s empowerment. Partnerships 
with Austria, Denmark, the European Union, Iceland, Ireland, South Korea, Japan, the 
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, the Department for International Development (DFID), the 
United States Agency for International Development and others, will be deepened. 
18. Building on the partnership strategy of the Regional Bureau for Africa, UNDP will establish 
a network of influencers for development to shape programming, apply human-rights-based 
approaches, digitalization, innovation, an HIV/AIDS dimension, and disaster risk management. 
UNDP will leverage three key enablers: the UNDP Accelerator Lab, to explore innovative 
solutions; digitalization; and the establishment of innovative financing facilities to scale up tested
solutions. 
19. To accelerate progress on gender equality, UNDP will invest in initiatives that: remove 
structural barriers to women’s economic empowerment, political and social participation and 
leadership; prevent and respond to gender-based violence; improve the integration of gender 
equality into natural resource management and disaster preparedness; and advance the women’s 
peace and security agenda.Inclusive and sustainable growth
20. UNDP will pursue stronger partnerships with bilateral agencies, international financial 
institutions and relevant United Nations organizations to support the development and 
implementation of policies and strategies that promote structural transformation in view of the 
opportunities presented by the the African Continental Free Trade Area. Building on its past 
strategic engagement in reactivating the industrialization discourse, partnerships will be deepened 
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World Trade Organization, 
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization and the International Trade Centre to 
articulate robust frameworks to guide the entire ecosystem. 
21. The focus will be on correcting structural constraints to build robust and integrated value 
chains in the agriculture, tourism and mining sectors, emphasizing local economic actors, micro, 
small and medium enterprises in commodity and service lines, and covering youth, women, 
people with disabilities, and refugees, including vulnerable groups. The goal is to strengthen
multi-stakeholder platforms to facilitate collaborative action across and within value chains. In 
partnership with UNCDF, the programme will advocate for sustainable and inclusive business 
models, digitize value chains, enhance digital skilling, promote financial inclusion, attract private 
capital, and de-risk financing. It will incentivize innovation, promote gender equity, advance 
reforms that ensure social and environmental returns, and build the resilience of businesses to 
shocks, learning from the experience of the COVID-19 pandemic. These interventions will 
facilitate the creation of productive, inclusive jobs for women and youth and provide a strong 
catalyst to advance the manufacturing agenda.
22. Requisite capacities of local governments in planning, coordination, capacity-building for 
local communities, monitoring and evaluation, within the realm of the local economic 
development policy, will be strengthened; as will building e-governance systems, with sustained 
advocacy for scale-up. The comparative advantage of several actors will be leveraged in 
articulating this agenda.
23. UNDP will partner with the private sector to: (a) support young entrepreneurs in innovating, 
growing and diversifying their enterprises; (b) foster the adoption of innovative, inclusive 
business models; (c) enable youth-owned micro, small and medium enterprises to recover from 
the impact of COVID-19 and other shocks; and (d) foster ecosystem platforms such as 
YouthConnekt. UNDP will leverage its innovative solutions such as the ‘gender seal’ programme,
which has been adopted by 45 companies. UNDP will intensify partnerships with the Private 
Sector Foundation Uganda, banks and banking associations, savings and credit cooperative 
societies, and investment, trade and commodity platforms.
Sustainable management of natural resources and resilient development 
24. Since the above priority sectors depend largely on natural resources, UNDP will invest in 
sustaining development gains and building resilience by protecting the ecosystem.
25. Capacities for robust environmental governance and management of natural resources will 
be strengthened, enabling equal participation by both women and men. There will be linkages 
with the transformational and inclusive governance priority area. Support will focus on integrated 
sustainable land management and restoration of degraded landscapes, including incentives for 
ecosystem restoration in refugee settlements and host communities; capacities of national and 
local governments, cultural and religious institutions to govern natural resources; and genderequitable citizen participation in environmental management and community resilience. Business 
models will be developed to foster ecosystem restoration and equitable access to and benefits
from natural wealth, as well as incentives for the private sector to provide job opportunities,
especially for vulnerable groups.
26. To promote access to affordable renewable energy options in underserved rural and urban 
communities, UNDP will support innovative off-grid clean energy technologies for cooking and 
lighting to benefit small businesses, women and youth entrepreneurs, and service delivery in the 
education and health sectors. Emphasis will be on supporting innovative and inclusive financing mechanisms such as financial aggregation and the use of digital technology for small low-carbon 
energy technologies; de-risking private-sector investment in decentralized energy and wastemanagement solutions; and piloting technologies and business models. UNDP will build on its 
Climate Promise to support the climate aggregation platform, the Pay-Go solar initiative, and 
implementation of the nationally determined contribution. Multi-stakeholder platforms will scale
up energy solutions.
27. Resilience to climate and disaster risks will be strengthened to: address drivers of disaster 
risks; strengthen risk governance institutions, laws, policies, strategies and financing; integrate
disaster risk reduction considerations into development programming, including at the localgovernment level; and enhance gender-equitable access to and use of disaster and climate 
information, products and services for early warning and action. Nature-based solutions and 
technologies will be promoted to reduce dependence on rain-fed agriculture and promote the 
uptake of climate- and disaster-risk transfer innovations leveraging South-South cooperation with 
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, South Africa and others. Coordination, contingency planning, and 
disaster response will be strengthened at national- and local-government levels, including the 
National Emergency Coordination and Operations Centre, to deal with disasters such as COVID19, locusts, and floods.
28. The programme will strengthen partnerships with relevant United Nations organizations and 
multilateral environmental financing institutions such as the Global Environment Facility and the 
Green Climate Fund (GCF), including the GCF direct-access entity in Uganda. New strategic 
partnerships will be established with the African Development Bank, the Islamic Development 
Bank, and the World Bank on climate resilience, and with the World Health Organization on 
COVID-19 response and e-health. UNDP is pursuing collaboration with development partners
such as DFID, Italy, and Norway. Non-traditional partners, private-sector actors, civil society 
organizations, foundations and relevant regional institutions will be engaged. Cross-border 
engagement will build on current initiatives by UNDP and other partners in transboundary
resources.
III. Programme and risk management 
29. Accountabilities of managers at country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to 
country programmes is prescribed in the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and 
Internal Control Framework.
30. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable a response to force majeure. The 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United 
Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
31. Any disruption of the 2021 general election could delay programme implementation and 
interventions to address post-election needs. Investments will be made with other development 
partners to strengthen the capacity of state and non-state actors to promote transparent, inclusive, 
credible and peaceful elections, and to leverage the systems for gender equality, conflict 
prevention and dispute resolution established in the previous programme. Implementation delays 
could be mitigated through direct implementation and fast-track approaches.
32. To address corruption challenges in the public sector that impede programme 
implementation, UNDP will build on its past investments in digitizing systems and processes to 
improve efficiency, transparency and accountability. 
33. UNDP will update its resource mobilization and communication plan and diversify its 
portfolio. A new office financial sustainability plan will be implemented in line with Executive 
Board decision 2013/9. United Nations joint programming instruments and UNDP costs incurred 
in implementing development activities will be charged to the relevant projects.34. Where capacity gaps exist at the national and local levels, UNDP will combine national 
execution with other modalities and strengthen national capacities to implement programmes. 
A focus on several strategic implementing partners will ensure that the programme delivers in 
high-impact areas. Regular dialogues on programme implementation will be held with partners 
to monitor progress and foster inclusivity and mutual accountability.
35. To mitigate any reputational risk of engaging with private-sector and civil society 
organizations, due diligence will be undertaken and United Nations Global Compact principles 
promoted to ensure the selection of institutions that can effectively deliver on programme results. 
36. The programme will be reviewed regularly to minimize shocks such as those resulting from 
the COVID-19 pandemic. 
37. To buffer any social or environmental risks, UNDP will apply its social and environmental 
standards and accountability mechanism. Early warning, risk monitoring, and gender- and 
conflict-sensitive risk analysis will be integrated into project design and implementation. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
38. Monitoring and evaluation will be aligned with the Cooperation Framework, NDP-III, and 
the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. Following United Nations Development Assistance 
Framework and independent country programme evaluation evaluations, the focus will be on 
defining results and baseline data and identifying reliable data sources for collection and use. 
Monitoring and evaluation will be guided by the UNDP handbook on planning, monitoring and 
evaluation for development results, and the UNDP evaluation guidelines, 2019.
39. UNDP will rely on country-level data sources such as the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, human 
development reports, and credible global reports. Data will be disaggregated wherever relevant 
and possible. UNDP, the Pulse Lab and partners will strengthen the national statistical system, 
research institutions and academia to support the evaluation function, and will provide evidencebased, gender-sensitive data that informs decision-making and fosters transformational 
development approaches. The focus will be on improving coverage of Sustainable Development 
Goals targets and strengthening the quality, reliability, comprehensiveness and timeliness of 
disaggregated data.
40. UNDP will participate in Cooperation Framework results groups to track outcome indicators, 
including using the United Nations electronic management information system. The gender 
marker will be used to monitor expenditure and improve gender-based planning and decisionmaking. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers, spot checks, and financial audits will 
complement regular programme monitoring for stakeholders. The approved evaluation plan will 
be the basis for decentralized evaluations, the next independent country programme evaluation
and the Cooperation Framework evaluation. 
41. Multi-year research will inform national poverty status reports, human development reports, 
and Sustainable Development Goals progress reports. Lessons learned will be documented to 
inform programming. Transformational results will be communicated through success stories and
real-life narratives, using innovative and relevant platforms. At least 5 per cent of programme 
contract agreements will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation and direct project costing,
computed and agreed on with the Government; 1.5 per cent to communication; and 1.5 per cent
to gender equality and women’s empowerment, focusing on strengthening staff and partner 
capacities in results-based management, financial and knowledge management. Annex. Results and resources framework for Uganda (2021-2025)
National priority: NDP-III objective 2. Strengthen the private sector to create jobs.
NDP-III objective 4. Increase productivity and well-being of population.
NDP-III objective 5. Strengthen the role of the state in development.
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP:
Outcome 1. By 2025 Uganda has inclusive and accountable governance systems and people are empowered, engaged and enjoy human rights, peace, justice and security (Related SDGs: 1-1717)
Related Strategic Plan (SP) outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Cooperation framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)
Data source and frequency of 
data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs
(including indicators, baselines and targets)
Major partners / 
partnerships /
frameworks
Estimated cost by
outcome ($)
Indicators
1. Primary government expenditures as 
a proportion of approved budget, by 
sector (Sustainable Development Goal – 
SDG 16.6.1)
Baseline (2019): 90.2% 
Target 98%
2. Proportion of women and youth in 
elected positions at various levels 
(SDG5.5.1,5.5.2, 16.7.1; Integrated 
Results and Resources Framework
(IRRF) 2.2): (a) Parliament, (b) LC 1-5 
Baseline Women: (a) 35%, (b) Local 
Council (LC) 1- LC5 - 41.4% Youth:
(a) 1.1%, (b) LC 1- LC5 -11.56%
Target Women: (a) 38%, (b) LC1- 
LC5 - 44% 
Youth: (a) 2%, (b) LC1- LC5 - 15%
3. Governance index: 
Baseline 55 (2018), 
Target 60
Source: Budget performance 
report 
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Finance, Planning and Economic 
Development (MoFPED)
Source: Inter-Parliamentary 
Union general elections report 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: Parliament of 
Uganda; Electoral Commission
(EC)/Uganda Bureau of Statistics 
(UBOS); Ministry of Local 
Government (MoLG) statistical 
abstract
Source: Mo Ibrahim 
African Governance Report; 
African Peer Review Mechanism
(APRM); World Bank reports
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim 
Fdti
Output 1.1. Institutions and systems at national and subnational levels 
enabled for effective and accountable service delivery in line with 
national, regional and international obligations and commitments 
(IRRF 1.2.1, 2.2.1, 2.2.2) 
Indicators
1.1.1. # of policy and legal frameworks developed at national and 
subnational levels creating equal opportunities, pro-poor growth and 
sustainable development (SDGs 5.1, 5.2, 10.3, 16) 
Baseline: 0 (2020); Target: 5; Source: Justice, Law and Order Sector 
(JLOS) annual report; Frequency: Annual
1.1.2. % of LGs showing improvement in the annual performance assessment 
(LGPA) 
Baseline: 58% (2020); Target: 80%, Source: MoLG performance 
assessment report; Frequency: Annual
1.1.3. # of target institutions with functional e-governance systems to 
promote efficiency and accountability (SDG 17.15.1/17.8) 
Baseline:1 (2020); Target: 3; Source: Government performance reports 
(GAPs); Frequency: Annual
Output 1.2. Strengthened capacity of people, especially marginalized 
and vulnerable groups, to participate in and benefit from governance 
and development at all levels (IRRF 2.2.2/2.2.3)
Indicators
1.2.1. Proportion of voter turnout by elective category and electoral levels 
(i.e., youth, persons with disabilities (PWDs), elderly) disaggregated by sex 
(SDG 16.8.1; NDP-III)
Civil society 
organizations 
(CSOs)
Ministries, 
Departments and 
Agencies (MDAs)
Media
United Nations 
organizations 
(UNOs)
Development 
partners
CSOs
MDAs
Media
Private sector
Human Rights 
Commission 
((HRC)
EC
UNOs
Regular: $12,900,000
Other: $16,371,848Baseline (2016): National elections: 67.61%; LCs: 46%
Target: National elections:72%; LCs: 75%; Interest groups (youth, PWDs, 
elderly): 70%; at least 68% of females and 72% of males 
Source: EC report on general elections 
Frequency: Annual
1.2.2. # of targeted non-state institutions with strengthened capacities for 
advocacy and engagement in the review and reform of legislation and 
policies for national and subnational governance and development
Baseline: 3 (2019); Target:10; Source: GAP report; Frequency: Annual
1.2.3. # of democracy institutions EC, HRC, Parliament) that effectively 
meet minimum core function performance benchmarks (SDG 16. A.1; 
modified SP2.2.2) 
Baseline: 1 (2020); Target: 3; Source: EC report, HRC reports; 
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.3. Capacity of state and non-state actors at local, national, 
and regional levels strengthened to sustain peace and security (IRRF
3.1.1/3.2.1/3.2.2)
Indicators
1.3.1. Extent to which an infrastructure for peace and security is functional 
(Scale 1-4) (SP3.2.1)
Baseline: 3. Partial (2020); Target: 4; Source: GAP report
Frequency: Annual
1.3.2. # of alternative conflict resolution, mediation and consensusbuilding mechanisms at national, subnational and regional levels targeting 
the marginalized, especially women and youth
Baseline: 0 (2020) Target: 5; Source: JLOS/GAP report
Frequency: Annual
1.3.3. Proportion of magisterial areas accessing state-funded aid legal 
services 
Baseline: 39% (2019); Target: 50, Source: JLOS annual report 
Frequency: Annual
MDAs
OPM
DLGs
UNOs
DFIDNational priority: NDP-III objective 1. Enhance value addition in key growth opportunities.
NDP-III objective 2. Strengthen private sector capacity to drive growth and create jobs.
NDP-III objective 3. Consolidate and increase stock and quality of productive infrastructure.
NDP-III objective 4
UNSCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP:
Outcome 2.1: By 2025, people, especially the marginalized and vulnerable, benefit from increased productivity, decent employment and equal rights to resources. (Related SDGs: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17)
Related SP outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions; 
Indicators:
1. Contribution to GDP by selected 
sectors (agriculture, tourism, mining, 
industry, manufacturing) (SDG 8.9.1)
Baseline (2018): Agriculture (22.9%), 
tourism (7.3%), mining (0.3%), industry 
(26.5%), manufacturing (15.4%) 
Target (2025): Agriculture (19.9%), 
tourism (8.5%), mining (5.7%), industry
(28.6%), manufacturing (20%)
2. Unemployment rate disaggregated by 
age and sex and PWDs (SDG 8.5.2)
Baseline 9.2% (Youth: 13.3%, 
Male: 6%, Female: 14 %) (2018)
Target 6.9% (Youth: 9.7%, Male: 5.2%, 
Female: 8.8 %), 2025
3. Ranking/score of Uganda in ease of 
doing business index: 
Baseline 116/60 (2020)
Target 100/80
Source: UBOS statistical 
abstract; labour force surveys 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: UBOS
Source: World Economic Forum
(WEF)
World Bank ease of doing 
business index 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: WEF
World Bank
Output 2.1.1. Capacities of targeted MDAs in agriculture, tourism and 
mining sectors are enhanced to develop and implement inclusive 
policies and strategies that increase productivity, improve 
competitiveness and facilitate market access for micro, small and 
medium enterprises (MSMEs) (IRRF 1.2.2/1.2.6/1.4.1/ 2.4.1)
Indicators
2.1.1.1. # of innovative, locally appropriate sustainable development 
initiatives developed and scaled up, targeting underserved 
communities/groups and women (SP 1.2.6)
Baseline: 100 (2019); Target: 150; Source: Sector reports; 
Frequency: Annual
2.1.1.2. # of policies and regulations developed to support productivity, 
enhance competitiveness and facilitate market access for MSMEs
(SDG 12.b.1, IRRF 1.2.2)
Baseline: 3(2020); Target: 8: 5; Source: Ministerial policy statements and 
GAP report, Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1.2. Public/private sector and MSMEs in targeted value 
chains (agriculture, tourism, mining, industry and energy) have 
increased capacity and access to productive assets and markets; and 
engage in green and inclusive businesses for livelihood and job creation 
(IRRF 1.4.1)
Indicators
2.1.2.1. # of new functional partnerships developed in the target value 
chains (SDG17.6.1) 
Baseline: 0; Target: 5; Source: progress reports;
Frequency: Annual 
2.1.2.2. # of inclusive green business models initiated or scaled up for 
improved livelihoods 
Government 
MDAs
PSF
Private sector
CSOs
Development 
partners
UNOs
MDAs
Local governments
Private sector, 
MSMEs
CSOs
Development 
partners
UNOs
Regular 
$15,626,000
Other 
$26,995,000Baseline: 16 (2020);Target: 100; Source: progress reports, sector 
performance reports; Frequency: Annual 
2.1.2.3. # of MSMEs utilizing supplier development platforms for 
inclusive and sustainable value chains (SP 1.4.1)
Baseline: 0 (2020); Target: 250; Source: Sector reports; 
Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1.3. Enabling environment strengthened to expand public 
and private financing for the achievement of the SDGs (IRRF 1.2.2) 
Indicators
2.1.3.1. Volume of additional resources leveraged through public and 
private financing for the SDGs with UNDP support (SP 1.2.2.2):
Baseline:0 (2020)
 (a)National level: (public, 0;private, 0)
 (b)Subnational level (public, 0;private, 0)Target:$2million
 (a)National level: (public, 0.5m;private, 0.5m)
 (b)Subnational level (public, 0.5m;private, 0.5m)
2.1.3.2. # of MSMEs developed targeting vulnerable women and youth
Baseline: 0; Target: 100; Source: progress reports, sector performance 
reports, Frequency: Annual
2.1.3.3. # of targeted MSMEs that have accessed inclusive financing
Baseline: 70; Target: 300; Source: progress reports, sector performance 
reports, Frequency: Annual
Output 2.1.4. Capacities of men and women, particularly youth and 
marginalized groups, enhanced to access and benefit from innovative 
technologies, natural and productive resources for expanded 
livelihoods, decent work and employment opportunities in formal and 
informal sectors (IRRF 1.1.2).
Indicators
2.1.4.1. # of new decent jobs (formal and informal) generated, disaggregated 
by sex, age, disability (SDG 8.9.2)
Baseline: 0 (2020); Target: 200,000 (120,000 F, 80,000 M) 
Source: UBOS statistical abstract, progress reports 
Frequency: Annual
2.1.4.2. Amount of financial resources mobilized to implement public-
private and civil society partnerships for SDGs (SDG 17171)
MDAs 
Local governments
Public/private 
sector
CSOs
Development 
partners
UNOs
MDAs 
Local governments
Private sector
CSOs
Development 
partners
UNOsBaseline: 0; Target: $50 million; Source: progress reports Frequency: 
Annual
National priority: NDP-III objective 1. Enhance value addition in key growth opportunities.
NDP-III objective 2
NDP-III objective 3
NDP III objective 4
UNSCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP:
Outcome 2.2. By 2025, Uganda’s natural resources and environment are sustainably managed, protected, and people –especially the vulnerable and marginalized – have the capacity to mitigate 
and adapt to climate change and disaster risks. (Related SDGs: 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 and 17)
Related SP outcome 3. Build resilience to shocks and crisis 
Indicators:
1. Proportion of terrestrial, inland water 
and wetlands conserved for biodiversity 
and ecosystem services (disaggregated 
by forest cover and wetlands cover) 
(SDG 15.1.1, 15.1.2) 
Baseline: Forest cover, 9.5%; Wetlands 
cover,10.9% (2019) 
Target Forest cover, 18%; Wetlands 
cover, 12% 
2. Economic loss from natural hazards 
as a proportion of GDP
(SDG 1.5.2, 11.5.2) 
Baseline 7.5% (2019) 
Target 5%
t
3. Proportion of population with access 
to electricity and modern cooking 
energy disaggregated by sex and 
rural/urban (SDG 7.1.1, 7.1.2, 
NDPIII)
Baseline Access to electricity, 21%; 
Clean energy used for cooking, 15% 
(2019)
Target Access to electricity, 30%; 
Clean energy used for cooking, 24% 
4. Annual emissions of carbon dioxide 
equivalent (per million metric tons) 
(SDG 9.4.1)
Baseline 3,230.7 (2015); Target 2,994 
Source: sector review reports
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Ministry of 
Water and Environment
Source: United Nations Office 
for Disaster Risk Reduction,
Desinventar for Uganda 
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: Office of the 
Prime Minister (OPM)
Source: GAP reports, National 
statistical abstract reports.
Frequency: Annual; 
Responsibility: OPM/UBOS
Output 2.2.1. Strengthened capacity of public and private institutions 
and communities to sustainably manage natural resources and protect 
vital ecosystems (IRRF 1.4.1/2.5.1/3.4.1)
Indicators
2.2.1.1: Natural resources that are managed under a sustainable use, 
conservation, access and benefit-sharing regime (SP 1.4.1):
Baseline: 2019
(a) Area of land under protection: 3,916,486 Ha
(b) Area of existing protected area under improved management: 
3,916,486 Ha
(c) Area under sustainable forest management (Ha)-0
(d) Area of land under sustainable land management regime (Ha)-0
Target:
(a) Area of land under protection (Ha)
(b) Area of existing protected area under improved management
(20,000 Ha)
(c) Area under sustainable forest management (4,000 Ha)
d) Area of land under sustainable land management regime (14,000 Ha)
Source: Sector performance reports; Frequency: Annual
2.2.1.2. Amount of financial resources mobilized and utilized for climate 
action (modified SP 2.5.1) 
Baseline: 0 (2020); Target: $30 million; Source: Sector performance 
reports; Frequency: Annual
2.2.1.3. # of people benefiting from nature-based solutions for improved 
livelihoods and climate action (SPs 3.4.1) 
Baseline: 0 (M/F) (2020); Target: 30,000 (1,4000 men, 1,6000 women)
Source: Sector performance reports; Frequency: Annual
MDAs 
UNOs
CSOs
Private sector
Regular 
$19,545,000
Other 
$45,955,000Source International Energy Agency
global data on emissions; Sector 
performance reports 
Frequency Annual
Output 2:2.2. Enhanced capacities of institutions and communities at 
national and subnational levels to mitigate and adapt to climate change 
and disaster risks (IRRF 1.3.1/2.1.1/3.3.1/2.3.1).
Indicators
2.2.2.1. # of men and women who use climate information services, and 
products, 
Baseline: 0 (2020), Target: F-24.5 millions, M-23.8 millions;
Source: Sector performance reports; Frequency: Annual
2.2.2.2. Proportion of local governments that adopt and implement local 
disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies in line with the Sendai Framework 
for DRR (modified SP, IRRF1.3.1): Baseline: 75% (2020); Target: 85%;
Source: Sector performance reports; Frequency: Annual
2.2.2.3. Extent to which an integrated climate information and disaster early 
warning system is functional (SDG 1.5.3, SP 3.3.1) 
Baseline: Partial (2019); Target: Fully; Source: Sector performance 
reports; Frequency: Annual
Output 2.2.3. Increased and equitable access to and use of modern, 
renewable and affordable energy sources and services (IRRF
1.5.1/2.1.1/2.5.1)
Indicators
2.2.3.1. # of households benefiting from clean, affordable and sustainable 
energy access (SP 1.5.1): 
Baseline: 2020
(a) Female-headed: 0
(b) Rural areas: 0 
(c) Urban and peri-urban areas: 0
Target:
(a) Female-headed: 30,000
(b) Rural areas: 100,000
(c) Urban and peri-urban areas: 50,000
Source: Sector performance reports; Frequency: Annual
2.2.3.2. Share of clean energy used for cooking (%) 
Baseline: 15 (2018); Target: 30, Source: Sector performance reports
Frequency: Annual
2.2.3.3: # of new development partnerships with funding for improved 
energy efficiency and/or sustainable energy solutions targeting underserved 
MDAs
UNOs
CSOs
Private sector
OPM 
MWE 
National Planning 
Authority (NPA)
MoLG
Local governments
MDAs
MEMD
REA
ERA
DLGs
Private sector
CSOs
UNOsBaseline: 0 (2020), Target: 20, Source: Sector performance reports 
Frequency: Annual
National priority: NDP-III Objective 4
NDP-III Objective 5. Strengthen the role of the State in development.
UNSCF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP:
Outcome 3.2. By 2025 gender equality and human rights of all people in Uganda are promoted, protected and fulfilled in a culturally responsive environment. (Related SDG: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17)
Related SP outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Indicators: 
1. Gender Inequality Index 
Baseline (2019): 0.531 
Target 0.2
2. Percentage of population with trust in 
the justice system
Baseline 59 % (2019)
Target 65 %
3. National budget compliance to gender 
and equity
Baseline 61% (2019)
Target 75%
Source: Uganda Human 
Development Report
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: UNDP, UBOS, 
OPM
Source: JLOS Report
Frequency: Annual 
Responsibility: JLOS
Source: Equal Opportunities 
Commission (EOC) report
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: EOC
Output 3.2.1. Capacities of government and non-government 
institutions at regional, national and subnational level strengthened to 
uphold positive social, cultural norms, values and practices that 
promote human rights, equality and non-discrimination (IRRF
1.6.2/2.4.1/2.6.1).
Indicators
3.2.1.1. Proportion of target government and non-government institutions 
with programmes/initiatives addressing values and practices that promote 
human rights, equality and non-discrimination
Baseline: 0 (2020); Target: 70% (govt: 75%, non-govt: 65%); 
Source: Sector reports; Frequency: Annual
3.2.1.2. # of targeted institutions with policies and procedures for dealing 
with sexual harassment and gender-based violence, and discrimination. 
(SDG 5.1.1) 
Baseline: 4 (2019); Target: 10; Source: GAP reports; Frequency: Annual
3.2.1.3. Proportion of gender-based violence cases reported to authorities 
and handled in the formal justice system disaggregated by type (SP 1.6.2)
Baseline: Defilement: 36.34%; Rape: 40.75%; Domestic violence: 8.2% 
Target: Defilement: 45%; Rape: 50%; Domestic violence: 20%
Source: Crime report; Frequency: Annual
Output 3:2.2. Strengthened capacities of government and nongovernment institutions to effectively plan, monitor and deliver public 
and private financing to social sectors in an equitable, genderresponsive, accountable and sustainable manner (IRRF
1.1.2/1.2.1/1.3.1/1.6.1/2.6.1).
Indicators
3.2.2.1. Value of resources made available to strengthen gender and human 
rights responsive statistical capacity (SDG 17.19.1)
Baseline: 0 (2020); Target: $2 million; Source: GAP reports
Faith-based and 
cultural Institutions
MDAs
CSOs
Private sector
UNOs
Faith-based and 
cultural Institutions
MDAs
Regular 
$4,000,000
Other 
$5,000,0003.2.2.2. # of MDAs and districts that have integrated gender and HIV/AIDS 
in their development plans, budgets and expenditure reports (modified SP
1.1.2)
Baseline: 20 (MDAs: 5, districts: 15 (2019); Target: 70 (MDAs:10,
districts: 60; Source: EOC annual reports, Annual progress reports
Frequency: Annual
3.2.2.3. # of private companies promoting accountability on gender equality 
through the UNDP gender equality seal program (modified SP 2.6.1) 
Baseline: 43 (2019); Target: 75; Source: Sector review reports; 
Frequency: Annual 
Private sector
UNOs