File Name: UKR-CPD-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: Ukraine
Country Code: UKR
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 5 - 11 September 2017
Start Year: 2018
End Year: 2022
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
6 July 2017
Original: English
1711373X (E) 010817
Second regular session 2017
5 - 11 September 2017, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Ukraine (2018-2022)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale ..................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management..................................................................................... 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 7
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Ukraine (2018-2022) ……………………………………… 9I. Programme rationale 
1. Since its independence in 1991, Ukraine has been building a competitive market economy 
supported by accountable and responsive public institutions. The global financial crisis 
truncated the rapid growth of the 2000s, triggering a 15 to 20 per cent contraction of gross 
domestic product (GDP) in 2008-2009. The post-crisis recovery was short-lived as the 
country became mired in political instability, leading to conflict, economic decline and high
unemployment. Between 2013 and 2015, GDP collapsed from $181 billion to $91 billion
($3,986 to $2,005 per capita GDP).
1
Fifty-seven per cent of Ukrainians live below the poverty 
line; nearly 40 per cent of households rely on social payments.
2 The 2017 economic outlook is 
more positive, with a forecast of 2 per cent growth.3 The business environment remains 
challenging: Ukraine ranks 80 of 190 countries in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business 
Index.4
2. Instability and conflict compound economic woes. In 2013-2014, the so-called “Revolution 
of Dignity” protested poor governance, corruption and impunity and ousted the 
administration. Conflict subsequently erupted in eastern Ukraine, where separatists took 
control of local government offices in parts of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts. Since then,
fighting has killed around 10,000 people, injured more than 22,000 and displaced more than 
1.7 million. The conflict resulted in widespread human rights violations, sexual and genderbased violence and economic decline. Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are particularly 
vulnerable (59 per cent of IDPs are elderly, 58 per cent are women and 8 per cent are 
children).
5 While the ongoing conflict undermines stability and economic recovery, 
emergency and early recovery needs continue to exist in eastern Ukraine. 
3. Governance challenges and vulnerabilities persist. Ukraine’s Government Effectiveness 
Index (- 0.51 in 2015)6reflects poor public service delivery and slow institutional reform. 
Despite improvements, the country is ranked 131 of 176 countries in the 2016 Corruption 
Perceptions Index
7
and 78 (of 113) in the Rule of Law Index.
8 Ukrainian women remain 
underrepresented at all levels of decision-making, occupying only 12 per cent of 
parliamentary seats and 15 per cent of positions in oblast councils. On average, women earn 
36 per cent less than men. Rural women are particularly vulnerable: 48 per cent do not have 
access to local medical services, 36 per cent do not participate in decision-making in their 
communities and 67 per cent cannot access the Internet from home.9 Gender-based violence is 
prevalent and increasing. Demographic decline is exacerbated by policy inattention to youth, 
particularly in the areas of education and employment.10 Notably, people living with HIV, 
persons with disabilities and drug users face significant barriers in accessing health care, 
education, employment and opportunities for civic participation.11
4. Sustainable development is constrained by environmental degradation, including air 
pollution, unsafe drinking water, contamination from the Chernobyl disaster and 
deforestation. Forty per cent of Ukraine’s territory is eroded land (expanding at 100,000 
hectares annually),
12 leading to $6 billion in annual economic losses.13 Despite rich natural 
environments and resources, Ukraine is one of the most polluted countries in the region. One 
 
1 www.data.worldbank.org/country/ukraine.
2
International Labour Organization, 'Social security system of Ukraine in 2014–15 and beyond: 
towards effective social protection floors'. 2016.
3 World Bank Ukraine Economic Update, 2016.
4 www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/ukraine
5www.un.org.ua/en/publications-and-reports/un-in-ukraine-publications/3700-humanitarian-needsoverview-in-ukraine-2016.
6 www.theglobaleconomy.com/Ukraine/wb_government_effectiveness/.
7 www.transparency.org/news/feature/corruption_perceptions_index_2016#table
8 www.data.worldjusticeproject.org/#/groups/UKR
9 UNDAF Country Analysis 2016.
10 Ibid.
11 www.hrw.org/world-report/2016/country-chapters/ukraine.
12 Ukraine National Academy of Agrarian Sciences, Report on Finalizing Land Reform, 2015. 
13 Tarariko O.H., Ilienko T.V. & Kuchma T.L., 'Sustainable Land Use Management and Soil 
Conservation: Urgency and Challenges in Modern Conditions,' Ukrainian Geographical Journal 3, 
2016.of the least energy-efficient countries in the world, Ukraine relies heavily on high-cost 
imports.14
5. The Government has stabilized the economy, restrained inflation and achieved modest 
growth,
15 but recognizes the critical need for innovative sustainable and inclusive 
development strategies. The President has declared that the Sustainable Development Goals 
will serve as a common foundation for reform. A multi-stakeholder approach was
implemented in all stages of adapting the Goals, with United Nations agencies, government, 
academia and civil society organizations (CSOs) participating in 50 national and regional 
consultations.
6. The 2020 Strategy for Sustainable Development of Ukraine prioritizes key reforms
including corruption, justice, health care and environmental protection.
16 The European Union
(EU) Association Agreement and the International Monetary Fund Memorandum on Reform
outline further reform commitments, designed to promote an inclusive economy, accountable 
government and human rights safeguards.17 The State Targeted Programme (to be endorsed in 
2017) prioritizes recovery and peacebuilding in eastern Ukraine. All UNDP programme 
outcomes reflect government priorities. 
7. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) evaluation 
commended the early response by UNDP to the eastern Ukraine crisis.
18 The Recovery and 
Peacebuilding Assessment determined that the UNDP reputation as an honest broker and its 
close working relationships with national and local governments strongly positioned UNDP to 
support the Government in managing the recovery of conflict-affected areas.
19 Due to 
effective performance on the ground and its emphasis on democratic governance, UNDP 
became a partner of choice in eastern Ukraine.20 The outcome evaluation recommended 
clearer identification of the UNDP niche in recovery and economic development, and 
effective targeting of vulnerabilities in conflict-affected areas; the new country programme 
addresses these issues.21
8. Outcome evaluations highlighted the relevance of the current programme and successful 
contributions to several reform initiatives, especially anti-corruption. The UNDP-supported 
electronic asset declaration was recognized as one of Ukraine’s most important anticorruption initiatives.
22 In a 10-year partnership with the EU, UNDP advanced participatory 
and inclusive approaches to development through the Community-Based Approach to Local 
Development programme, resulting in a high impact on individuals and communities.23 These
approaches will be scaled up and integrated with other programmes funded by the EU and 
United States Agency for International Development to support ongoing decentralization 
reforms. Outcome evaluations also noted the benefits of South-South cooperation, particularly 
from EU accession States, in areas of energy efficiency, civic engagement, decentralization 
and anti-corruption. 
9. UNDP outcome evaluations
24 and the United Nations Country Team scorecard highlighted
weaknesses in gender mainstreaming in programming. Studies have highlighted women’s 
disproportionate vulnerabilities in conflict-affected areas and the need to recognize and 
 
14 Desilver, Drew. “The most ̶ and least ̶ energy-intensive nations.” Pew Research Center, 20 October 
2015.
15 www.worldbank.org/en/country/ukraine/publication/ukraine-economic-update-fall-2016.
16 www.reforms.in.ua/sites/default/files/imce/2020booklet21_11engpreview.pdf.
17 United Nations in Ukraine, 'Post-2015 Ukraine: The Future We Want', 2013 Kiev.
18 Olver, Richard, 'United Nations Partnership Framework 2012-2017. Forward Looking Evaluation & 
Comparative Advantage Analysis', 2016.
19 www.un.org.ua/images/V1-RPA_Eng_Vol1.pdf.
20 Ukraine country case study: Evaluation of the UNDP Strategic Plan 204-2017, Outcome 6. Julian 
Murray Consulting, March 2017. 
21 Vera Devine, Final Evaluation of Poverty Reduction/ Recovery Outcome, 2017.
22 CNN, “Fighting Corruption: Ukraine Breaks New Grounds with Mandatory Asset Declaration,” 
2016.
23 Assessment of the Community-Based Approach to Local Development Project, Phase III, Ukraine, 
2017.
24 Kran, Marcia, Evaluation of UNDP Ukraine’s Democratic Governance Assistance 2012-2016. 2016.; 
Devine, Vera Final Evaluation of Poverty Reduction/ Recovery Outcome, 2017; Bajraktari, Elinor,
Environment and Sustainable Development Outcome Evaluation, 2017.support the role of women in conflict prevention, resolution and reconciliation.
25 The new 
country programme will ring-fence at least 15 per cent of resources for gender equality and 
women’s empowerment, strengthen gender expertise and prioritize the needs of women in 
conflict-affected areas and in other vulnerable situations.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
10. The country programme, developed in consultation with Government, CSOs and other 
partners, will support the Government’s National Development Strategy and Action Plan by 
promoting sustainable and inclusive human development with a focus on empowerment and 
the needs of vulnerable and marginalized people. UNDP will ensure efficient use of resources 
by: promoting risk-informed development; pursing opportunities for South-South 
collaboration (particularly with new EU Member States); integrating gender equality and 
human rights into programme interventions; assessing environmental and social impact of all 
initiatives; using data, analysis and research to generate policy dialogue; and by scaling up 
cost-effective, innovative models (including open data platforms) to reach out to vulnerable 
groups. 
11. The programme strategy is built on three interlinked development pathways: inclusive and 
effective democratic governance; inclusive and gender-responsive sustainable development; 
and recovery and peacebuilding in conflict-affected areas. These are in line with the priorities 
of the Government’s development strategy and reform agenda, and anchored in the UNDAF,
2018-2022. The programme builds on the United Nations common country analysis, national 
consultations, theory of change and lessons learned from evaluations, which identify the 
UNDP comparative advantage based on its proven successes, nationwide field presence, 
strong partnerships with national and local administrations, and recognized leadership and 
coordination (e.g., as chair of the anti-corruption and human rights coordination groups). 
While maintaining a country-wide focus, the programme will target the needs of vulnerable 
populations in conflict-affected regions and poor rural areas. Other target groups include 
unemployed youth and women, victims of violence (including domestic violence), persons 
with disabilities, people affected by HIV and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and 
intersexual individuals.
Pathway I. Inclusive and effective democratic governance 
12. In line with the national strategy and reform agenda, UNDP will support institutional and 
policy reforms that foster inclusive, gender-responsive and sustainable human development. 
13. Inclusive and responsive decision-making and policies. Working with the Ministry of 
Regional Development, UNDP will strengthen capacities to integrate the sustainable human 
development agenda into development plans and statistical systems, and to engage civil 
society, women and youth in transparent development processes. UNDP will use its 
convening power to forge effective partnerships among the private sector and communitybased organizations (including women’s organizations and civil society hubs established in 
the previous cycle). Partnering with EU and building on successful community-based 
programming, UNDP will support local governments to strengthen public service delivery,
focusing on poverty reduction and environmental sustainability. Responding to the 
parliamentary needs assessment,
26 UNDP will continue partnering with the EU and its 
Member States to strengthen parliamentary capacities. Working closely with the Parliament’s 
Gender Public Council and with local authorities, UNDP will promote women’s national- and 
local-level representation and leadership. 
14. Accountable institutions and human rights. UNDP will enhance institutional capacities 
for democratic representation and accountability at central and local levels. Co-chairing the 
anti-corruption donor coordination group, UNDP and partners will support the development 
of transparent systems and processes. South-South partnerships will be harnessed to 
 
25 Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom, 'Voices from Ukraine: Strengthen the Role 
and Contribution of Ukrainian Women in Conflict Prevention, Resolution, Peacebuilding and 
Reconciliation', 2014.
26 Pat Cox, European Parliament’s Needs Assessment Report of Ukraine, 2016.strengthen Ukraine’s anticorruption architecture (e.g., engagement with the Romanian anticorruption agency on electronic verification and conflict of interest). UNDP will work with 
the Ombudsperson, Ministry of Justice and CSOs to strengthen systems, laws and policies 
that advance realization of human rights, and to improve access to justice, especially for 
vulnerable groups. Other initiatives will focus on empowering vulnerable persons and groups 
to assert their rights and seek remedies for grievances, including discrimination and domestic 
and gender-based violence. UNDP will continue to work with the Office of the United 
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to support implementation 
of the recommendations of the universal periodic review and the Committee on the 
Elimination of Discrimination against Women.
Pathway II. Inclusive and gender-responsive sustainable development
15. To maximize Ukraine’s economic potential and protect its natural resource base, UNDP 
will assist the Government, communities and the private sector to plan and manage a lowcarbon, energy-efficient economy, ensuring equitable access to resources, particularly for 
marginalized groups. Programme interventions will be guided by environmental and social 
assessments to avoid adverse impact, and address the environmental risks of Chernobylcontaminated areas, conflict-affected areas, industrial regions, land erosion and waste 
management. 
16. Green economic development. Through dedicated policy advocacy and capacitybuilding interventions, UNDP will support the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade 
and other ministries to align Ukraine’s Sustainable Development Strategy with national 
policies and promote climate-resilient policies. With the International Labour Organization
(ILO) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), UNDP will invest in the creation of 
green jobs and livelihood opportunities for vulnerable groups, with a special focus on youth 
employment and business development in new economic sectors, such as information and 
communication technology and biotechnology. Following the results of assessments27 and 
building on partnerships with regional business associations, the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Trade and ILO, UNDP will strengthen advocacy and programming to 
address gender pay gaps and promote women’s economic empowerment. 
17. Improved energy efficiency and sustainable access to energy. UNDP will provide 
policy advice and technical assistance to the Cabinet, Ministry of Energy, Ministry of 
Regional Development and the State Agency for Energy Efficiency on addressing barriers 
that hinder implementation of Ukraine’s energy efficiency strategy. Building on its 
partnership with the International Finance Corporation, UNDP will partner with the banking 
sector to launch a new financing mechanism for energy efficiency. Harnessing its convening 
power, UNDP will bring together the Government, private sector, CSOs and communities to 
debate policy settings and scale up proven solutions for promoting energy efficiency, use of 
renewables and biodiversity, turning environmental challenges into economic opportunities. 
South-South and triangular cooperation will be pursued with new EU Member States that 
have implemented sustainable and modern energy-efficient solutions and funding 
mechanisms.
Pathway III. Recovery and peacebuilding in conflict-affected areas
18. UNDP interventions in eastern Ukraine will support post-conflict recovery and longerterm development by strengthening institutions and building people’s skills. This focus is 
based on the United Nations, EU and World Bank Recovery and Peacebuilding Assessment 
endorsed by the Government in August 2015. UNDP will work closely with the World Bank 
Group and United Nations agencies in operationalizing the Multi-Partner Trust Fund to target 
at-risk/vulnerable groups, and to build a more vibrant, cohesive and resilient Ukraine.
19. Sustainable economic recovery. UNDP will facilitate stakeholder cooperation to restore 
critical conflict-affected social and economic infrastructure. Working closely with regional
and local authorities in targeted, conflict-affected regions and building on the seminal UNDPEuropean Investment Bank partnership, UNDP will ensure that all infrastructure and 
 
27 UNDP, In-depth capacity assessment of selected business membership organizations, 2016.rehabilitation work is designed in line with joint assessments of social and environmental 
impacts, integrity, gender, human rights and "building back better" principles. In partnership 
with business membership organizations, programme interventions will focus on job creation 
and small- and medium-sized enterprise development, scaling up successful practices to other 
regions. Partnering with ILO and building on a functional assessment of the State 
Employment Service, UNDP will facilitate cooperation between the Ministry of Social Policy 
and counterparts in Western Balkan countries to promote employment for vulnerable women 
and men. 
20. Restoring and reforming local governance structures. In line with the Government’s 
decentralization reform agenda, UNDP will support the Ministry of Regional Development 
and local authorities to strengthen institutions and processes that address socioeconomic and 
environmental needs in conflict-affected areas. Working with UN-Women, the programme 
will prioritize women’s empowerment by strengthening the organizational and advocacy 
capacities of women’s groups to address gender and conflict risks. Interventions will focus on 
sharing knowledge within Ukraine and with other countries via South-South learning and will 
scale up successful practices on decentralization and economic development. 
21. Building resilience. UNDP will provide policy advice and technical assistance to the 
Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and IDPs, local
governments, law enforcement agencies and CSOs to improve services, build trust, promote 
dialogue and citizen security and protect conflict-affected populations, women and girls. 
UNDP will work with justice sector agencies to scale up community-based early warning and 
monitoring systems in conflict-affected regions. UNDP will work with administrative service 
centres and UN-Women to ensure that identified concerns about women’s safety and genderbased violence are being addressed.
28
III. Programme and risk management 
22. Implementation modalities will be agreed with country authorities. UNDP will transition 
from a predominantly direct implementation modality to a national implementation modality 
(NIM). When using NIM, UNDP will conduct micro-assessments (following the harmonized 
approach to cash transfers) of the ability of potential implementing partners to manage 
resources. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness 
will be charged to projects, as per Executive Board decision 2013/9.
23. UNDP will continue to regularly update and monitor risk management plans through 
proactive analysis, management and adaptive programming. Key risks and mitigation 
strategies, based on the theory of change analysis, include: 
(a) Conflict. The ongoing conflict presents risks to programme sustainability and staff 
security. Community insecurity has increased, affecting especially women. UNDP will 
partner with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and other 
United Nations agencies to implement the humanitarian contingency strategy. Risk 
assessment and mitigation will be addressed through weekly political economy analysis and 
consultations with key partners and security service providers. Tested business continuity and
security plans and standard operating procedures are in place and updated regularly to 
mitigate the impact of existing and potential threats to UNDP staff. Attention will be paid to 
addressing women’s vulnerabilities and risks in eastern Ukraine through direct services;
(b) Fiduciary and reputational risks. Vested economic interests challenge UNDP-supported 
procurement of medicines and anti-corruption systems. To mitigate the risks, UNDP will 
continue to monitor media and strengthen communication and quality control mechanisms. 
UNDP will proactively engage all key stakeholders to promote transparency and will harness 
South-South and triangular cooperation to apply best European and international standards;
(c) Strengthening resource mobilization and programme sustainability. Reductions in 
regular resources and reliance on a few donors may affect programme sustainability. UNDP
 
28 UNDP, Security and Justice in Ukraine, 2017.will deepen and diversify resource mobilization by targeting emerging donors and
international financial institutions. UNDP will continue to work with United Nations agencies 
and the World Bank to operationalize the Multi-Partner Trust Fund for recovery and 
peacebuilding. UNDP will pursue joint resource mobilization and programming with UNWomen, OHCHR, the United Nations Children's Fund and World Health Organization in 
areas where joint assessments have identified synergies/complementarities. UNDP will also 
continue to serve as a trusted partner for implementation of government resources. Additional 
risk management strategies include: regular reviews of the UNDP financial sustainability plan 
and results of a recent change management process (which include a "Plan B" to scale down 
interventions in case of reduced funding); pursuing direct project costing and costefficiencies; and additional cost-saving measures to be prepared for potential shocks. UNDP 
will further buttress donor confidence by strengthening results-focused communication, using 
social media and undertaking value-for-money assessments;
(d) Monitoring and evaluation and data quality. Risks related to data quality and 
monitoring and evaluation are posed by the credibility of survey data, the sufficiency of 
funding for surveys and real and perceived assessment objectivity and security risks 
(particularly in eastern Ukraine). UNDP risk mitigation strategies include: earmarking at least 
5 per cent of resources for monitoring and evaluation, collaborating with statistics units and 
research organizations to ensure data quality and corroboration, developing transparent 
checklists for annual assessments and using innovative data gathering methods.
24. UNDP will work closely with its partners to turn challenges into opportunities by
strengthening programming and responding to emerging needs. In eastern Ukraine, UNDP 
will continue to cooperate with other United Nations agencies to build resilience of conflictaffected communities. A joint programme with UN-Women will strengthen women’s 
economic empowerment through investments in women’s entrepreneurship, enhanced 
advocacy and integration of gender-responsive budgeting into development strategies. UNDP 
engagement with the Ministry of Health on procurement of medicines will provide additional 
opportunities to offer lifesaving medicines and spearhead reforms in building an open and 
effective health care system. 
25. Across all programming, UNDP will undertake environmental risk assessments and 
mapping of hazards using the Flash Environmental Assessment Tool,
29 monitor compliance 
with environmental and social safeguards and implement "do no harm" principles for each 
programme/project. Opportunities will be leveraged from existing UNDP-facilitated SouthSouth partnerships, e.g., between the Ukrainian Ministry of Infrastructure and local authorities 
from Republic of Korea on green and clean infrastructure models. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
26. Monitoring and evaluation will be conducted in partnership with the Government, civil 
society and United Nations agencies through programme/project board meetings and 
evaluations. Chairing the UNDAF monitoring and evaluation group, UNDP will lead United 
Nations efforts in ensuring coherent and quality monitoring, data collection, analysis,
corroboration, reporting and evaluation. UNDP will promote the use of national systems to 
monitor outcome indicators, and will support strengthening of data management capacities. 
UNDP will work with partners to ensure adequate analysis, use and dissemination of data to 
promote evidence-based programming and policymaking. Following upgrades to the 
monitoring and evaluation and communication units, the country office will invest in
innovative data gathering methods, such as feedback loops and big data. Successful pilots on 
open data platforms for Parliament, civil society and medicine procurement will be scaled up 
across other programming areas (e.g., decentralization, anti-corruption). UNDP will continue 
to invest in staff monitoring and evaluation capacities.
27. UNDP will strengthen the capacities of the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade
and other line ministries to monitor implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, 
 
29 https://docs.unocha.org/sites/dms/Documents/FEAT_Version_1.1.pdfincluding through development of measurement methodologies and ensuring alignment with 
international standards. UNDP will work with the State Statistics Service to address issues of 
missing data, quality and disaggregation by sex, age, geographic area and vulnerability. The 
Goals will frame a multi-year research and knowledge management agenda, to be developed 
in collaboration with leading think tanks, CSOs and university-based research centres.
28. Challenges persist regarding availability, reliability and frequency of national data and 
statistics, including on social cohesion in Eastern Ukraine, trust in justice and security 
institutions and the effectiveness of transparent procurement by the Ministry of Health. UNDP 
will address these gaps by supporting key surveys, such as annual surveys of social cohesion 
and reconciliation and trust in key justice institutions, and annual cost-effectiveness analyses 
of procurement of medicine and medical products (in collaboration with State Statistics 
Service, United Nations agencies and research organizations such as Kiev School of 
Economics and Institutes of the National Academy of Sciences). For seven output indicators, 
UNDP will partner with institutions such as State Statistics Service and oblast administrations
on annual assessments of secondary data.
29. The programme builds on multiple assessments that have identified gender gaps across the 
three pathways. It includes gender-explicit outcomes, outputs and indicators in each pathway;
the UNDP gender marker will be used to monitor results for gender equality. Marker results 
will be corroborated with results from mandatory gender analysis provided by gender experts 
in each programme/project. In addition, UNDP will ensure that at least 15 per cent of all 
resources contribute to gender equality and women’s empowerment. 17-11373X (E) 010817
*1711373*
Annex. Results and resources framework for Ukraine (2018-2022)
UNDAF outcome indicators,
baselines and targets
Data source and frequency 
of data collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets)
Major partners/
Partnerships frameworks
Indicative resources 
by outcome (in $)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Responsive, efficient and accountable governance institutions are able to respond to citizens' needs and provide high-quality public services
RELATED NATIONALLY ADOPTED SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS: 5,10,16
UNDAF OUTCOME: 1. By 2022, women and men, girls and boys participate in decision-making and enjoy human rights, gender equality, effective, transparent and non-discriminatory public services
Strategic Plan, 2014-2017 OUTCOME: 2. Citizen expectations for voice, development, the rule of law and accountability are met by stronger systems of democratic governance
1.1. Share of population satisfied 
with recent use of public services, 
by sex and age (SDG)
Baseline (2017): N/A
Target (2020): 40%
1.2. Availability of legal 
frameworks that promote, enforce 
and monitor equality and nondiscrimination (SDG)
Baseline (2016): 3 
Target (2020): 4 
1.3. Public confidence in the courts 
(SDG)
Baseline (2015): 5% 
Target (2020): 35% 
1.4. Percentage of women in the 
Parliament (SDG, UNDP 
Integrated Results and Resources 
Framework (IRRF) 2.3)
Baseline (2015): 12% 
Target (2020): 30%
1.5. Corruption Perception Index 
Source: UNDP survey 
Frequency: biennial
Responsible: UNDP, 
UNICEF
Source: Parliament
Frequency: annual
Responsible: UN-Women, 
ILO
Source: Democratic 
Initiatives Foundation survey
Frequency: annual 
Responsible: UNDP
Source: Inter-Parliamentary 
Union database
Frequency: annual 
Responsible: UNDP, 
UN-Women
Source: Transparency 
Output 1.1. Regional and local authorities have scaled-up knowledge 
and skills to engage communities in planning, coordination, delivery and 
monitoring of public services provision
Indicator 1.1.1: Share of people with improved access to health and 
social services, provided with UNDP support 
Baseline (2016): 0%
Target (2022): 20% (women), 20% (men); 20% (vulnerable groups)
Source: Annual reports of Ministries of Health and of Social Policy
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of people with scaled-up access to 
administrative services with UNDP support
Baseline (2016): 13,496 (men), 14,621 (women)
Target (2022): 23,500 (men), 26,500 (women) 
Source: Community-Based Approach to Local Development 
programme database
Output 1.2. National institutions, systems, laws and policies advance the 
equitable realization of human rights, especially among vulnerable 
groups 
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of new policies and institutional reforms 
targeting the most vulnerable groups, including persons with disabilities 
[IRRF 1.2.1]
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 7
Cabinet of Ministries, 
Ministries of Interior, of 
Justice, of Education, of 
Health, of Social Policy and 
of Temporarily Occupied 
Territories and IDPs;
National Agency for 
Corruption Prevention, 
National Anti-Corruption 
Bureau, Ombudsperson's
Office, Parliament, State 
Statistics Service
 
CSOs
ILO, UN-Women, UNFPA,
UNHCR, UNICEF, WHO 
EU, Governments of Canada,
Denmark, Sweden, USAID
Regular: 
$944,000
Other: 
$90,800,000score (SDG)
Baseline (2015): 27 
Target (2020): 40
1.6. Share of survivors of physical 
or sexual violence who sought help
Baseline (2014): 32%
Target (2020): 50%
International
Frequency: annual
Responsible: UNDP, 
UNODC
Source: UNFPA survey 
Frequency: every five years 
Responsible: UNFPA, 
UN-Women
Source: CSOs/line ministry reports
Indicator 1.2.2: Share of 2017 universal periodic review 
recommendations implemented 
Baseline (2017): 0%
Target (2022): pending recommendations of 2017 universal periodic 
review
Source: Ombudsperson annual reports 
Indicator 1.2.3: Number of cases addressed by the Ombudsperson (per 
10,000 population)
Baseline (2016): 5.3
Target (2022): 8
Source: Ombudsperson annual reports
Output 1.3. Civil society is more engaged in national development 
processes 
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of new policies and strategies developed and 
operationalized with active CSO participation 
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 10
Source: CSOs/line ministry reports
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of CSO hubs with strategies and funding to 
scale up civic engagement
Baseline (2016): 6
Target (2022): 15
Source: CSO reports
Output 1.4. Rule of law institutions have capacities and functions to 
effectively fulfil their mandates
Indicator 1.4.1: Share of people who trust justice institutions supported 
by UNDP
Baseline (2016): 23.5%
Target (2022): 33%
Source: Democratic Initiatives Foundation survey
Indicator 1.4.2: Extent to which the Parliament has improved its 
administrative and human resource capacities required to discharge its NATIONAL PRIORITY: To create favourable business environment, support development of small and medium enterprises, attract investments, facilitate international trade and enhance labour 
market efficiency
RELATED NATIONALLY ADOPTED SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS: 1,8,9,10
UNDAF OUTCOME: 4.1. By 2022, all women and men, especially young people, equally benefit from an enabling environment that includes labour market, access to decent jobs and economic 
opportunities
Strategic Plan, 2014-2017 OUTCOME: 1. Growth is inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded 
2.1. Employment rate of 
population aged 15-70, by sex and 
age (IRRF 1.1)
Baseline (2016): 24.4% (women 15-
Source: State Statistics Service
Frequency: quarterly
Responsible: ILO, UNDP, UNFPA
Output 2.1. National and subnational institutions are better able to 
develop and implement policies and measures that generate 
sustainable jobs and livelihoods
Cabinet of Ministers,
Ministries of Economic 
Development and Trade, of 
Regional Development, of 
Regular: 
$377,600
Other: 
 
1 UNDP is not building capacity of Parliament (0), capacity has not improved (1), very partially improved (2), partially improved (3), largely improved (4)
mandates in relation to law-making, oversight and representation [IRRF 
2.1.1.A]1
Baseline (2016): 2 
Target (2022): 4
Source: Annual assessment of UNDP based on administrative records of 
the Parliament 
Indicator 1.4.3: Share of public officials declaring assets in open 
registry annually
Baseline (2016): 17.5%
Target (2022): 95%
Source: National Agency for Corruption Prevention reports
Output 1.5. Measures scaled up and implemented to prevent and 
respond to domestic and gender-based violence
Indicator 1.5.1: Number of victims of domestic and gender-based 
violence provided with scaled-up legal and security services, provided 
with UNDP support
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 5,000
Source: MSP reports24), 29.6% (men 15-24), 51.6% 
(women total), 61.6% (men total)
Target (2020): 27% (women 15-
24), 31% (men 15-24), 54% (women 
total), 63% (men total) 
2.2. Wage gap between men and 
women (IRRF 4.1)
Baseline (2016): 1.34 
Target (2020): 1.25
2.3. Ranking in Ease of Doing 
Business Index (SDG)
Baseline (2015): 81
Target (2020): 30 
Source: State Statistics Service
Frequency: quarterly
Responsible: ILO, UNDP, 
UN-Women
Source: World Bank Ease of Doing 
Business Index
Frequency: annual
Responsible: ILO, UNDP
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of new jobs and other livelihoods 
generated [IRRF 1.1.1]
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 90,000 (men), 130,000 (women), 30,000 (youth)
Source: Annual assessment by UNDP based on project databases 
and reviews
Indicator 2.1.2: Extent to which policies, systems and/or 
institutional measures are in place and scaled up at the national and 
subnational levels to generate and strengthen employment and 
livelihoods [IRRF 1.1.2]2
Baseline (2016): 1
Target (2022): 3
Source: Annual assessment based on project databases and reviews
Output 2.2. Public institutions and private entities effectively 
cooperate to improve the business environment 
Indicator 2.2.1: Share of members of UNDP-supported business 
membership organizations satisfied with the business environment
Baseline (2016): pending baseline survey (October 2017)
Target (2022): pending baseline survey
Source: Business association reports/enterprise surveys
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of businesses that benefit from scaled-up 
advisory support
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 30 (total); 10 (women-led)
Source: Business Associations/Chamber of Commerce reports 
Social Policy, 
President’s Office 
Business associations, CSOs,
ILO
IFC
EU, Government of Sweden, 
USAID, 
$27,900,000
 
2 Not adequately (1), very partially (2), partially (3), largely (4)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Improvement of the quality of environment, maintenance of ecosystem stability, energy security and transit to innovative, efficient and sustainable use of energy resources
RELATED NATIONALLY ADOPTED SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS: 6,7,11,12,13,14,15
UNDAF OUTCOME: 4.2. By 2022, national institutions, private business and communities implement gender-responsive policies and practices to achieve sustainable management of natural 
resources, preservation of ecosystems, mitigation, adaptation to climate change and generation of green jobs 
3 Not improved (1), improved to a very partial extent (2), partial extent (3), large extent (4).
Strategic Plan, 2014-2017 OUTCOME: 1. Growth is inclusive and sustainable, incorporating productive capacities that create employment and livelihoods for the poor and excluded 
3.1. Share of areas of territories 
and natural reserves in the total 
territory (SDG)
Baseline (2015): 6.3% 
Target (2020): 10.4% 
3.2. Share of energy produced 
from renewable sources in the 
total final energy consumption 
(SDG)
Baseline (2015): 4.9% 
Target (2020): 11% 
3.3. Share of population benefiting 
from improved coverage by costefficient and sustainable energy in 
the public sector, by sex [IRRF 
1.4.]
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 15% (women), 15% 
(men) 
Source: Ministry of Ecology 
and Natural Resources
Frequency: annual
Responsible: FAO
Source: State Statistics Service
Frequency: annual
Responsible: UNDP
Source: State Statistics Service
Frequency: annual 
Responsible: UNDP
Output 3.1. Comprehensive measures on climate change adaptation and 
mitigation across various sectors are scaled up
Indicator 3.1.1: Extent to which implementation of comprehensive 
measures (plans, strategies, policies, programmes and budgets) to 
achieve low-emission and climate-resilient development objectives have 
improved [IRRF 1.4.2]3
Baseline (2016): 1
Target (2022): 4 
Source: Annual desk review (plans, strategies, policies, programmes and 
budgets)
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of local civil servants and CSO 
members with improved knowledge and skills on effective climate 
change-related planning and management because of UNDP 
training
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 300 (women), 300 (men)
Source: project databases, training documents
Output 3.2. Local authorities and communities adopt genderresponsive and sustainable solutions for increased energy efficiency 
and modern energy access, especially of renewable energy
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of new renewable energy generation sites 
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 20
Source: Ministry of Energy reports
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of public spaces and buildings with 
improved level of energy efficiency in target municipalities 
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 20 (public spaces), 20 (buildings)
Source: Ministry of Regional Development reports
Indicator 3.2.3: Number of new green jobs created with UNDP 
Ministries of Agriculture, 
of Energy, of 
Infrastructure, of Ecology
and Natural Resources, of 
Economic Development 
and Trade, of Regional 
Development, 
State Agency for Energy 
Efficiency, President’s 
Office
CSOs, 
GEF, IFC, 
EU, USAID
Regular: 
$566,400
Other: 
$41, 900,000NATIONAL PRIORITY: Recovery and peacebuilding in eastern Ukraine, which involves facilitation of socioeconomic development of local communities to improve quality of life by strengthening 
their capacities and stability
RELATED NATIONALLY ADOPTED SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOAL: 16
UNDAF OUTCOME: 3.1. By 2022, communities, including vulnerable people and IDPs, are more resilient and equitably benefit from greater social cohesion, quality services and recovery support
Strategic Plan, 2014-2017 OUTCOME: 6. Early recovery and rapid return to sustainable development pathways are achieved in post-conflict and post-disaster situations
4.1. The level of social cohesion in 
Eastern Ukraine (level of intergroup tensions; level of trust in 
local and central authorities) on a 
scale from 1 to 10
Baseline (2017): pending baseline 
survey (September 2017)
Source: Social cohesion and 
reconciliation (SCORE) surveys
Frequency: biennial 
Responsible: IOM, UNDP, 
UNICEF
Output 4.1. Conflict-affected communities feel safer and satisfied with 
security services, following UNDP support
Indicator 4.1.1: Share of conflict-affected women and men that feel 
safe outside the home
Baseline (2016): 37% (women), 75% (men)
Target (2022): 47% (women); 85% (men)
Local authorities and 
communities, 
Ministries of Temporarily 
Occupied Territories and 
IDPs, of Regional 
Development, of Social 
Policy, of Youth and Sports;
Regular: 
$944,000
Other: 
$75, 600,000
support, disaggregated by sex
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 1,400 (men), 1,600 (women)
Source: Project databases/annual assessment
Output 3.3. Local authorities develop gender-responsive solutions at 
subnational levels for the sustainable management of natural resources, 
ecosystem services, chemicals and waste
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of new partnership mechanisms with funding 
for sustainable management solutions of natural resources, ecosystems 
services, chemicals and waste at subnational level [IRRF 1.3.1]
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 17
Source: Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources, regional 
administration reports
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of new partnerships for sustainable 
management of natural resources that integrate gender equality and 
women’s empowerment principles 
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 10
Source: Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources, regional 
administrations reports Target (2022): baseline survey 
4.2. Proportion of women and girls 
subjected to physical, sexual or 
psychological violence in the last 12 
months, by form
of violence (SDG, IRRF 4.3)
Baseline (2014): 17% (any form), 
8.8% (physical), 2% (sexual), 14% 
(psychological) 
Target (2020): 15% (any form), 6% 
(physical), 1% (sexual), 10% 
(psychological)
4.3. Extent to which people in 
eastern Ukraine feel safe in their 
community, by sex and age on a 
scale from 1 to 10
Baseline (2017): pending baseline 
survey (September 2017) 
Target (2022): pending baseline 
survey
Source: UNFPA survey (DHSbased)
Frequency: every 5 years 
Responsible: UNDP, UNFPA,
UNHCR, UN-Women
Source: SCORE surveys
Frequency: biennial
Responsible: IOM, UNDP, 
UNICEF
Source: UNDP justice and security surveys
Indicator 4.1.2: Share of conflict-affected women and men satisfied 
with quality of security services with UNDP support
Baseline (2016): 53% (women); 68% (men)
Target (2022): 63% (women); 78% (men) 
Source: SCORE surveys
Indicator 4.1.3: Intergroup tensions score
Baseline (2017): pending baseline survey (September 2017)
Target (2022): 20% above baseline
Source: SCORE surveys
Output 4.2. Crisis-affected women and men have more sustainable 
livelihoods opportunities, including jobs, created with UNDP 
support
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of people benefiting from emergency jobs and 
other livelihoods in crisis or post-crisis settings [IRRF 6.1.1]
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 100,000 (women), 50,000 (men)
Source: Annual assessments by UNDP/Regional administrations
Indicator 4.2.2: Number of conflict-affected women and men 
benefiting from improved infrastructure and quality public services with 
UNDP support
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 1,000,000 (women), 1,000,000 (men)
Source: Annual assessments by UNDP, regional administrations
Output 4.3. National and regional authorities have the knowledge and 
skills to engage communities in gender-responsive planning, 
coordination, delivery and monitoring of recovery efforts
Indicator 4.3.1: Number of national and regional governmental 
agencies with improved capacity in community engagement, genderresponsive planning, coordination and monitoring of recovery efforts
Baseline (2016): 0
Target (2022): 6
Source: Annual assessments by UNDP, regional administrations
National Police, 
State Employment Service
ILO, IOM, UN-Women, 
UNHCR, UNICEF, 
UNOCHA, UNV
EIB, EU, Governments of 
Czech Republic, Japan, 
Netherlands, Poland, 
Romania, Sweden, 
Switzerland, UK Aid, 
USAID, 