File Name: URY-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Uruguay
Country Code: URY
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1–4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
2 December 2020
Original: English
2016241X (E) 040121
First regular session 2021
1–4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Uruguay (2021–2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management …………………………………………………….…………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Uruguay (2021–2025) ……………………………………… 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. According to the Human Development Report, 2019, Uruguay belongs to the group of countries 
with very high human development. Since 2013, it has been ranked by the World Bank among highincome countries, with a per capita gross national income of $16,230 in 2019. Since 2003, the 
Uruguayan economy has enjoyed positive economic growth rates, averaging 3.9 per cent from 2003 
to 2019. Prudent macroeconomic policies, diversified trade partners, and a strong influx of foreign 
direct investment have fueled growth and helped the country withstand regional shocks. Despite this
progress, from 2015 onwards gross domestic product growth rates have been low, with the economy 
expanding at a meagre 0.2 per cent in 2019. The COVID-19 crisis hit Uruguay at a time of economic 
stagnation. Structural constraints to growth are found in areas such as infrastructure investment, 
integration into global value chains, education, and the intensive use of natural resources.
2. Economic growth, coupled with expanded social policy coverage, paved the way for a substantial 
reduction of poverty, which fell from 32.5 per cent in 2006 to a record low of 7.9 per cent in 2017. 
However, the rate of poverty reduction slowed significantly after 2011, reaching 8.8 per cent in 2019. 
As the poverty reduction rate decreased, social policies became increasingly challenged and ultimately 
struggled to further reduce the gap in access to education and housing. Addressing entrenched poverty 
will require long-term policy planning and sector-specific actions that go beyond monetary transfers
and address vulnerabilities to climate risks. These efforts will be carried out in the context of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, putting further stress on economic performance and well-being. Although 
Uruguay has one of the largest middle classes in Latin America, a sizeable portion of it remains 
vulnerable to economic shocks, which could precipitate a fall into poverty. 
3. Poverty is especially prevalent among children, women, and Afro-descendants. Children under 
the age of 6 had the highest prevalence of poverty compared to all other age groups (17.2 per cent in 
2018). At the other end of the scale, the poverty rate among those aged 65 or above was 1.4 per cent, 
suggesting pronounced intergenerational inequalities. Moreover, the labour market is particularly 
challenging for younger workers: unemployment is at 20.2 per cent for those 29 and younger, while 
total unemployment is half that figure. Afro-descendants faced higher poverty and unemployment 
rates in 2018 (17 per cent and 11 per cent, respectively) compared to the general population 
(8.3 per cent and 8 per cent). Gender inequality is a major challenge in terms of human development. 
Uruguay’s femicide rate (1.7 per 100,000 in 2018) places Uruguay 6th out of 16 countries in Latin 
America and the Caribbean for which data is available. The gender pay gap has declined but still 
persists, particularly among less-educated women (in 2020, Uruguay scored 0.7 in the Gender Gap 
Index in the area of economic participation and opportunity, meaning that women are 30 per cent less 
likely to enjoy equal economic participation and opportunities than men). Women have a low level of 
representation in political office (only 22.2 per cent of seats in the national parliament were held by 
women in 2019) as well as in leadership positions in businesses and trade unions. Territorial 
inequalities persist, with inequalities in access to services and opportunities between rural and urban 
areas, and the northern region lagging in terms of development (the northern department of Rivera had 
the lowest regional Human Development Indicator in 2017, scoring 0.765 – 10 per cent below 
Montevideo, at 0.841). Key indicators reveal gaps among subnational regions; for example, informal 
labour accounted for 20.5 per cent of employment in the metropolitan southern region in 2019 but 
reached 40.5 per cent in the north-eastern region.
4. UNDP has built strong reputational capital in Uruguay, as a result of long-standing support in 
the public policy arena. It is recognized as a trustworthy, transparent and efficient development partner 
supporting the advancement of long-term development goals with a global perspective. This 
legitimacy allows UNDP to take a leading role in promoting democratic debate and open dialogue, 
and in articulating interinstitutional efforts aimed towards the accomplishment of development goals.
5. UNDP works alongside partners to address national challenges and opportunities across the 
country, while also being part of key conversations on political and technical issues in global networks and forums. This has allowed UNDP to become a significant actor in generating and diffusing
knowledge, underpinning the implementation of evidence-based policies, and providing substantive 
technical assistance and advice in every phase of the policy cycle.
6. UNDP has developed a strong record of knowledge and data generation for the promotion of
sustainable development. The present global scenario calls for the convergence of these efforts 
towards a catalytic platform of knowledge and research that encompasses both the creation and 
strategic communication of information and public policy analysis. There is an increased demand for
innovation in knowledge-sharing and development among local networks, with an emphasis on 
reducing territorial disparities. UNDP will boost its unique capability of sharing nationally generated 
knowledge and solutions, while also promoting learning from and adaptation of international 
expertise.
7. The promotion of innovation and knowledge exchange has the potential to disseminate
experiences and collaboration among territories within the country that are in search of similar 
solutions, as well as between Uruguay and countries in the region and the rest of the world. Localizing
the Sustainable Development Goals is a key component of the territorial strategy. By leveraging 
previous experiences and with clear road maps, UNDP will support the achievement of critical goals,
incorporating the new sustainable development framework at the local level. 
8. UNDP has developed considerable expertise in building state capabilities, making contributions 
that strengthen public institutions in the areas of social protection, environmental regulation and 
democratic governance. Flexibility and adaptability have transformed UNDP into a partner of choice 
for innovation and experimentation in public policy.
9. The independent country programme evaluation in 2019 highlighted that many key UNDP 
achievements are linked to its strategic position, which is based on reputational capital, administrative 
efficiency, and a permanent offer of expertise to complement national development efforts and 
capacities. UNDP made significant contributions to the formulation and implementation of a new 
generation of social policies that contributed to reducing social inequalities, addressing labour and the 
economic inclusion of vulnerable sectors of the population. UNDP had a key role in strengthening 
institutional capacities and supporting the implementation of policies and practices for the sustainable 
management of natural resources and biodiversity conservation; pollutant reduction; climate change
mitigation and adaptation; and disaster risk reduction. UNDP has contributed to greater citizen 
participation and enabled increased transparency, accountability and efficiency of public institutions. 
The evaluation noted that UNDP support to South-South and triangular cooperation left room for 
improvement, however.
10. In the context of the graduation of Uruguay to the status of net contributor country, UNDP will 
pursue more strategic ways of addressing complex and multidimensional development issues. UNDP 
will leverage thematic expertise to promote dialogue and the design of innovative public policy. 
Through a cross-sectoral and multi-stakeholder approach, UNDP will fulfill its integrator role in three 
interconnected dimensions: (a) analytic framework (by redefining issues into a systemic approach);
(b) tactical coalitions and alliances (by consolidating a core set of partnerships and constantly 
searching for theme-specific and dynamic collaborations); and (c) inter-agency cooperation. This 
involves understanding how to move from managing projects to integrating and interconnecting 
portfolios. The new Accelerator Lab will serve as a catalytic platform for new partnerships, 
instruments and knowledge-sharing, supporting the country in placing nature and people at the centre
of public policy. In understanding the complexity of development challenges and designing a 
comprehensive portfolio of interventions to address these issues, UNDP will further enhance its 
partnerships with the Government, civil society, academia, and the private sector.
11. Special emphasis will be placed on promoting South-South and triangular cooperation, and on
identifying, mapping, matching and facilitating opportunities for knowledge-sharing and exchange. 
12. UNDP will support a paradigm shift in public administration reform by assisting in its 
ditid thtbliht f Miitf EitThfitif thsocial protection matrix, the reform of the social security systems, the enhancement of science and 
technology policies and the development of human capital will generate increased social cohesion and 
multidimensional resilience.
13. There will be a renewed focus on citizen security and innovative approaches to addressing recent
expressions of organized crime and drug trafficking. Monitoring the implementation of the 
comprehensive gender-based violence law benefits women and girls through the various mechanisms, 
services and public policies for prevention and care for victims. 
14. UNDP will support an agenda of economic and productive transition to promote sustainable and 
more resilient territories and communities. As a UNDP institutional first mover on Sustainable 
Development Goals integration, UNDP Uruguay designed and implemented the Redefining Future 
Uruguay Studio in 2019, which used design thinking to propose a holistic approach to addressing risks 
and enhancing opportunities for long-term sustainable development in relation to the largest foreign 
direct investment in the history of Uruguay.
15. Through its role as a convener and integrator, UNDP has strengthened processes of inter-agency 
participation and dialogue. UNDP works in close collaboration with other agencies on issues such as: 
gender-based violence and women’s political participation (United Nations Entity for Gender Equality 
and the Empowerment of Women – UN-Women); public information and information pollution 
(United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization – UNESCO ); territorial policies 
related to children and adolescents (United Nations Children’s Fund – UNICEF); lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex issues, racial disparities and data (UNFPA); migrant 
populations (International Organization for Migration – IOM); disabilities, human rights and leaving 
no-one behind (Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights – UNHCHR); 
agroecology, green and blue economy (United Nations Environment Programme – UNEP, UNIDO, 
UNITAR, OIT, Food and Agriculture Organization – FAO); climate change adaptation (FAO), energy 
sector transition (United Nations Industrial Development Organization – UNIDO), reducing emissions 
from deforestation and forest degradation (UNEP, FAO); social security reform, data (World Bank, 
UNFPA, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean – CEPAL). With the Resident 
Coordinator’s Office, UNDP has engaged and led diverse inter-agency processes, including the 
integrated response to the socio-economic impact of COVID-19.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
16. The overarching vision of the programme is to promote transformative processes to achieve 
effective models of governance, aiming at sustainable consumption and production models, collective 
well-being and comprehensive resilience. The new context posed by COVID-19 presents challenges 
but also opportunities to build back better. UNDP will provide rapid responses that both serve shortterm urgencies and incorporate long-term and future-oriented priorities along several dimensions, 
including the provision of health and social services, care for the most vulnerable populations, and
knowledge generation for policy design in the post-crisis recovery.
17. UNDP will accelerate its transition from operational and administrative to more substantive 
support at every step of the policy cycle. While the new country programme builds on initiatives and 
experience developed in past cycles, it also allows for UNDP to accompany the Government in 
exploring new agendas, approaches and topics to achieve its strategic development priorities.
18. The UNDP strategy to support Uruguay in achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development will focus on three critical nodes. Each node constitutes a space where a set of issues 
interact and connect with an orientation to produce change. The strategy seeks to leverage the 
interconnection between national, regional and global priorities reflected in the Strategic Plan, 2018-
2021, while incorporating the vision outlined in the Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025. The main 
dimensions reflected in the priorities of the governing coalition include: public administration reform; 
government efficiency and transparency; housing and social-territorial integration; human security; work and education capabilities; leaving no-one behind; and sustainability. The critical nodes 
approach provides clusters of strategic opportunities on which to base programme formulation.
Node 1. Economic-productive transition for equality and sustainability
19. UNDP will support the country in moving towards sustainable productive systems, investments 
and consumption practices that contribute to an equitable distribution of benefits at both social and 
territorial levels. UNDP will support the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Mining, the Ministry of 
Environment, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries by implementing and 
interconnecting projects and plans, generating evidence, strengthening capacities and facilitating 
intra- and inter-institutional coordination, in both the public and private sector, in its transition towards 
a sustainable development model. UNDP will promote the integration of productive and 
environmental policies in production systems and value chains. It will help catalyse the development
of new competitive advantages that are less intensive in the use of natural resources based on 
technology and knowledge, such as the strategic transition towards sustainable and low-carbon 
mobility. It will also promote the development of alternative, green, circular, social and solidarity 
economies, based on proximity, quality and know-how, cultural heritage and biodiversity, sustainable 
natural resources management, and clean and renewable energies.
20. The transition to a sustainable production and consumption model implies protecting the 
livelihoods of vulnerable people, creating green and inclusive jobs and a healthier environment for the 
entire population. The improvement of ecosystem services through adequate environmental 
management, and gender-responsive climate change mitigation/adaptation and biodiversity 
conservation measures, generates direct benefits such as safe, inclusive, dynamic and resilient 
territories, particularly for the most vulnerable communities. Inclusive employment strategies generate 
direct benefits to population groups presenting structural challenges. Young people and women are 
prioritized to overcome situations of informality, develop skills for reconversion and job placement,
and advance their educational trajectories.
21. The consolidation of the national innovation ecosystem and the expansion of the research and 
development agenda result in benefits to society as a whole, in particular to the most vulnerable 
populations. It creates conditions to design public policy responses and architecture solutions to 
complex issues on the present agenda (homelessness, persons deprived of liberty) as well as on the 
‘frontier’ agenda (food biotechnology, medicinal cannabis, sustainable mobility).
Node 2. Enhanced capabilities for social inclusion and citizen participation
22. Uruguay has important agendas pending when it comes to social inclusion: continue expanding
basic capabilities to historically excluded groups and communities, and increase general capacities 
(agency, empowerment, voice, active and effective political participation) at all levels (people, groups, 
communities and institutions). 
23. UNDP will contribute to transforming the public sector by supporting a new functional career 
system and modern human management policies, generating direct benefits in civil service 
management through a clear system of incentives and transparent rules for career advancement and 
professional development. This will benefit the country through the retention of qualified personnel 
in the public sector, and through greater efficiency in public management.
24. Leveraging on previous experience working across the country, UNDP will advance towards the 
capacity development of subnational governments and improved coordination between different levels 
of government. UNDP will support regional networks of local governments and multi-stakeholder
dialogue, improving the effectiveness and approach of public policy actions and strengthening local 
development processes. This will create conditions for the participation of young people and women 
in decision-making, which will in turn increase the incidence of new agendas and the inclusion of 
these groups in areas of personal and collective development.
25. UNDP will work towards enhancing the social protection policy of Uruguay by supporting 
fitf tbilitlitd idbd tfiyouth and the informal sector. It will provide technical assistance for incorporating multidimensional 
welfare metrics and institutional strengthening.
26. UNDP will ensure that the post-COVID-19 redefining and transforming stages are based on the 
principle of leaving no one behind, supporting actions and mechanisms that empower historically 
vulnerable groups, including Afro-descendant communities, institutionalized persons, lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex people and those with disabilities. Through its catalytic 
platforms, UNDP will support the country in implementing transformative social policies that combine 
basic universal frameworks with targeted actions, and in building productive capacity through 
integrated approaches. 
27. UNDP will support the digital transformation strategy led by the Uruguay Electronic 
Government and Information Society Agency and the Office of Planning and Budgeting to promote 
open spaces for participation, planning future scenarios, and coordination between the various levels 
of government. UNDP will support the Ministry of Labour, the Ministry of Education, and the National 
Office of Civil Service in overcoming critical skills, educational and aspirational gaps.
Node 3. A new architecture of solutions for social cohesion
28. Differential trajectories of access to opportunities and welfare persist in Uruguay, exacerbating
socio-territorial segregation. Together with civil society organizations, the Ministry of Environment 
and the Ministry of Social Development, UNDP will support contextualized universal solutions for 
social cohesion and community resilience from a comprehensive and inclusive governance 
perspective. The informal and precarious housing agenda has been a government priority in successive 
administrations, and UNDP intends to boost its relevance in cooperation with the Housing and Urban 
Planning Ministry and subnational governments.
1
29. A reformed social protection matrix would focus on vulnerable groups through increased 
coverage of services and benefits. The social security reform envisaged would generate conditions for 
system sustainability and would secure inter-generational and horizontal equality. The target groups 
identified for this set of actions include informal, precarious and young workers and caregivers. 
30. Vulnerable households would benefit from comprehensive public housing policies that improve 
their living conditions and social well-being, and would participate in decision-making and social 
integration spaces. Groups in situations of exclusion, such as those living in informal urban 
settlements, overcrowded houses or homelessness, would benefit through public policy responses that 
could remove restrictions, generate empowerment and promote autonomy.
31. Women’s and girls’ empowerment are mainstreamed throughout all programme outcomes, while 
also represented in a single output for increased accountability and visibility. This stems from a human 
rights and gender perspective highlighting the relevance of maintaining focus on what should be done 
and how. The country needs to make a leap in terms of gender relations: making gender equality an 
objective of concrete policies, and making institutions gender equitable at all levels. Disability rights 
and empowerment are mainstreamed throughout all programme outcomes. This stems from a human 
rights perspective that highlights the relevance of maintaining focus on both what should be done and 
how it should be done so as to leave no one behind. The country also needs to make a leap in terms of 
disability rights: this requires making non-discrimination, the removal of barriers, and the 
enhancement of equal opportunities objectives of concrete policies, and making institutions disabilityaccessible at all levels.
32. The theory of change of the country programme will be operationalized across three platforms:
(a) knowledge and research; (b) innovation; and (c) connection between global and local networks. 
33. UNDP will build its partnerships strategy on a dynamic system of alliances. This will allow 
iterative collaboration with different stakeholders, consolidating the core coalition – led by the 
1 The Neighborhood Improvement Programme is the main UNDP
supported state initiative in this field;Government – and tactical issue-based networks to respond to individual challenges. UNDP will 
continue to strengthen its partnership with the Uruguayan International Cooperation Agency as its 
main counterpart, and will further deepen its relationships with academia, trade unions, think tanks, 
civil society organizations and the private sector.
34. The key financing partners are the Government, international financial institutions, particularly
the Inter-American Development Bank, and vertical funds – the Global Environment Facility and the 
Green Climate Fund. UNDP will also promote the impact investing ecosystem in Uruguay and private 
sector investments towards the 2030 Agenda.
35. UNDP will reinforce South-South and triangular cooperation strategies, positioning Uruguay as 
a provider of expertise and building on its cumulative experience from the binational Mexico-Uruguay 
Cooperation Fund programme. Decentralized cooperation will also be promoted.
III. Programme and risk management
36. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the Programme and 
Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control Framework.
37. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced by 
direct execution for part or all of the programme to respond to force majeure. The Harmonized 
Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations 
organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
38. The government coordinating agency will be the Uruguayan Agency for International 
Cooperation, and other national and subnational authorities will be implementing partners, as defined 
in the Cooperation Framework. 
39. As a net contributor country, Uruguay will receive UNDP support in implementing articulation 
mechanisms for donors and international partners, seeking greater coherence and efficiency in
cooperation results. The partnership and resource mobilization strategy will focus on financing 
opportunities for developing innovative solutions to tackle complex development challenges in a high 
human development country context. UNDP will collaborate with the Government to facilitate SouthSouth and triangular cooperation, and will explore financing opportunities from other sources for 
strategic initiatives at government request. 
40. UNDP has identified potential risks and assumptions (political, socio-economic and healthbased) that could affect programme implementation. In the context of a ‘government coalition’, 
internal negotiation difficulties within the coalition or the political system could affect the priorities 
defined in the country programme. Moreover, the slowdown in the economy, exacerbated by the 
impact of COVID-19, could deepen financial and budgetary constraints and distributional tensions. In 
that context, UNDP will continue to promote dialogue processes with political parties, academia, civil 
society and the private sector to discuss envisaged reforms. UNDP will also continue to play an 
integrator role within the United Nations country team, including in monitoring the socio-economic 
impact of COVID-19, providing technical inputs for the design of government responses.
41. COVID-19 provides an opportunity to experiment and test new solutions in contexts of 
uncertainty. The economic slowdown poses challenges that will only be overcome through alternative 
consumption and production models. The shock suffered by the private sector constitutes a critical 
juncture for creating pathways of cooperation with new partners in the public-private interface.
42. The dynamics of the governing coalition call for the implementation of innovative mitigation 
and risk management actions, such as proactively involving key stakeholders by ‘working out loud’43. UNDP will regularly monitor the political, socio-economic and pandemic situation, adhering to 
its Social and Environmental Standards and Accountability Mechanism. UNDP will use risk 
monitoring as a tool for early warning, risk management and decision-making.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
44. Monitoring and evaluation of country programme interventions will be assessed by applying
UNDP policy and quality criteria for programme management. To assess progress towards the 
development goals and outcomes, UNDP will use the results and resources framework and relevant 
indicators in the Cooperation Framework and the country programme document. UNDP will collect 
data on indicators on an annual basis and update them in a programme/project database. UNDP will 
prepare an annual report to be shared with national counterparts during the annual programme review,
and will encourage implementing partners to utilize project indicators disaggregated by sex, age, 
geographic location and other relevant variables.
45. Periodic monitoring of outcome and output indicators will be assessed based on data sources 
from the National Institute of Statistics, reports and databases of ministries and other relevant agencies, 
project-generated information, and international statistics. Partnerships with academic institutions, 
public institutions and civil society organizations will be expanded to contribute – in a joint effort with 
the United Nations development system – to monitoring development outcomes and outputs.
46. Following on the Cooperation Framework and the country programme evaluation plan, 
evaluations will be undertaken, in collaboration with national partners, to capture lessons learned and 
generate evidence-based knowledge, so as to inform UNDP on public policies. UNDP will support 
national institutions in producing information to strengthen their capabilities in monitoring and 
evaluating policies and will explore innovative approaches for public policy evaluation. 
47. In cooperation with the Regional Bureau and national counterparts, UNDP will continue 
monitoring the socio-economic impact of COVID-19 and generating recommendations for the design 
and implementation of the national response policy.Annex. Results and resources framework for Uruguay (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: An economy that innovates, generates employment and guarantees development sustainability; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1, 2, 3, 5, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1. By 2025 Uruguay promotes a transition towards sustainable production and consumption systems, based on 
innovation, knowledge, science and technology, strengthening resilience and equality.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3. Build resilience to shocks and crises
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME (in 
thousands of $)
CO2 emissions (Gg -
gigagrams) per unit of gross 
domestic product (GDP)
Baseline (2020):9.08
Target (2025):8.78
Data source / frequency: 
Nationally determined 
contribution (NDC) 
monitoring, reporting and 
verification (MRV) system / 
biennial
Research and development 
expenditure as a proportion of 
GDP
Baseline (2018):0.45%
Target (2025): 1%
Data source / frequency: 
National Research and 
Innovation Agency, Office of 
Planning and Budget / annual
Informality rate 
Baseline (2019): 24.8 
Target (2025): 20
Data source / frequency: 
Household survey, National 
Institute of Statistics / annual
Data source: Ministry of 
Environment (MOE), 
Ministry of Agriculture
Livestock and Fisheries
(MGAP), Ministry of 
Industry, Energy and Mines 
(MIEM), NDC MRV system, 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Unit, National Institute for 
Employment and Professional 
Training (INEFOP), Resident 
Coordinator’s Office, 
Direction of Planning, 
University of the Republic.
Frequency: annual
Output 1.1. Sustainable production and consumption practices 
implemented to generate competitive advantages, prevent 
environmental degradation, protect livelihoods and create green 
and inclusive jobs.
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of instruments1(laws, national plans 
and policies) promoting sustainable production and 
consumption practices
Baseline (2020: 5
Target (2025): 9
Output 1.2. Environmental management and restoration 
measures applied for the improvement of ecosystem services and 
to increase the resilience of territories and communities.
Indicator 1.2.1. Total native forest area (ha)
Baseline (2012): 849,969 ha
Target (2025): 849,960 ha (unconditional); 892,458 ha 
(conditional upon external funding)
Output 1.3. Gender-responsive climate change mitigation and 
adaptation measures implemented for raising climate ambition, 
promoting low-carbon development, energy transition and 
fostering resilience and inclusion.
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of plans and strategies developed 
(NDCs, long-term strategies, national adaptation plans) as 
reported in adaptation communications and national 
communications
Baseline (2020): 3
Target (2025): 9
Indicator 1.3.2. Number of electric vehicles operating in public 
transport
Uruguayan Agency for 
International Cooperation 
MOE
MIEM
MGAP
Ministry of Tourism 
Ministry of Labor and 
Social Security 
Ministry of Education and 
Culture 
National Emergency System
United Nations 
organizations
Academia
Private sector
Civil society
Green Climate Fund, 
Global Environment Facility
Other: $35,817
1 Law of Comprehensive Waste Management, Law of water and land for agricultural use, National Environmental Plan for Sustainable Development, Law of Territorial Organization and Sustainable Development, National Energy Policy.Baseline (2020): 60
Target (2025): 315
Output 1.4. Increased coverage of employment policies that 
generate conditions for high-quality jobs through upskilling and 
reskilling strategies and public-private partnerships, with focus 
on youth and women.
Indicator 1.4.1. Number of people who participated in public 
reskilling processes and obtained employment
Baseline (2019): 26,957
Target (2025): 30,000
Output 1.5. The national innovation ecosystem achieves closer 
partnerships and aligns investment flows and initiatives with 
sustainable solutions for building back better.
Indicator 1.5.1. Number of financing instruments to pilot
programmes to mobilize investment opportunities 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 2
Indicator 1.5.2. Percentage of women over total students in 
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics programmes 
at public university (or all universities if data is available). 
Baseline (2018): 44.1
Target (2025): 50
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: An efficient Government, territorially present and providing accountability to the citizens; SDGs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2. By 2025 Uruguay has modernized public management processes through substantive 
decentralization and promoting citizen participation, increasing accountability and transparency.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Percentage of people 
supporting democracy as a 
form of government 
(variation): (a) Increases; 
(b) Stabilizes; (c) Decreases; 
(d) Same tendency
Baseline (2018): 61%
Target (2025): (a) Increase 
Data source /frequency: 
Latinobarómetro / biannual.
Trust in institutions
(variation): (a) Increases; 
(b) Stabilizes; (c) Decreases; 
(d) Same tendency
Baseline (2018):
Data source: National Civil 
Service Office (ONSC), 
PDGS, Public data, Report 
on labor links with the state
from National Civil Service 
Office, Household Survey, 
National Institute of 
Statistics, Institute for 
Women (Inmujeres)/ UNDP.
Frequency: Annual for all 
and at least once for the 
Household survey.
Office
Output 2.1. The public sector reform is supported by an 
organizational restructuring, the improvement of human 
management policies and the creation of an incentive system for 
public competitive career pathways, creating an adaptive efficiency 
and results oriented management.
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of Ministries participating in 
organizational restructuring processes. 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 8
Indicator 2.1.2: New career system encourages capacity building 
in the public sector (Yes/No)
Baseline (2020): No
Target (2025): Yes
Uruguayan Agency for 
International 
Cooperation 
Civil Service 
National Office 
Office of Planning and 
Budget 
Ministries
Public enterprises 
Academia
Inter-American 
Development Bank 
United Nations 
organizations
Other: $39,803Armed forces: 62%
Police: 59%
Electoral institutions: 47%
Judiciary: 39%
Government: 39%
Congress: 33%
Political parties: 21% 
Target (2025) All categories 
(a) Increase
Data source/ frequency: 
Latinobarómetro / biannual.
Indicator 2.1.3. Mechanisms put in place for the periodic 
measurement of dispersion among public wages for equal scale 
and grade, and public-private wage gap for professional workers. 
Baseline (2020): No
Target (2025): Yes
Output 2.2. Subnational governments improve their development 
planning, coordination, integration, and management capabilities 
through positive linkages between urban, peri-urban and rural 
areas, the enhancement of local assets, and innovation. 
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of departments that have an integrated 
financial information system as an input for strategic planning 
Baseline (2020): 7
Target (2025): 14
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of regional development plans that 
(a) respond to population dynamics; (b) ensure balanced territorial 
development; and (c) increase local fiscal space
Baseline (2020): 2
Target (2025): 4
Output 2.3. Civic and political participation are enhanced through 
legislation quality improvement, engagement initiatives for the 
inclusion of women and youth in collective actions, and policies 
addressing digital disruptions. 
Indicator 2.3.1.Proportion of women in public positions at 
national and subnational level including Executive branch, 
Parliament and subnational governments: (a)increase 
significantly (+50%), (b) increase slightly (-50%), (c) decrease, 
(d) unchanged
Baseline (2019): Legislators (both chambers): M 69,4%; 
F 30,6%.; Executive branch: M 63%; F 37%; Subnational governments: M 62%; F 38%
Target (2025): All categories increase at least slightly 
Output 2.4. Public and private institutions promote a gender 
mainstreaming strategy that encompasses new agendas 
incorporating an intersectionality framework acknowledging the 
relevance of power imbalances, gender bias and cultural change.
Indicator 2.4.1. Contribution of unpaid work to gross domestic 
product
Baseline (2013): 32%
Target (2020): 25%
Indicator 2.4.2. Number of public institutions that implement the 
Gender Seal.
Baseline (2020): 14
Target (2025): 20Indicator 2.4.3. Number of private entities that implement the 
Gender Strategy.
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 5
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Public policies that ensure education, social protection and health of quality to all people SDGs 3, 4, 5, 6, 16, 17
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3. By 2025 Uruguay activates a new generation of public policy institutional architectures 
and governance models to promote social cohesion, social protection and multidimensional well-being.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions
Quantitative housing deficit
Baseline (2019): 65,331
Target (2025): 40,000
Data source / frequency: 
Housing and Urban Planning 
Ministry / annual
Percentage of people never in 
fear of criminal violence
Baseline (2018): 20
Target (2025): 30
Data source: Latinobarómetro 
Frequency: annual.
Social security financial result 
over GDP
Baseline (2020): -1%
Target (2025): -1% or less
Data source / frequency: 
Ministry of Finance and 
Economic Affairs / annual
Data source: Neighborhood 
Improvement Programme
(PMB), Plan Juntos, Plan 
Nacional de Realojos, 
Canelones, Humano; 
Latinobarómetro, Ministry of 
Finance and Economic 
Affairs
Housing and Urban Planning 
Ministry 
Frequency: annual
Output 3.1. Strategy for participatory, integrated and sustainable 
human settlement planning and management through housing, 
mobility and basic services, including climate change adaptation 
and mitigation measures
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of existing informal settlements 
Baseline (2018): 607
Target (2025): 567
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of housing programmes that incorporate 
climate change adaptation and mitigation measures through new 
or existent housing typologies
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2025): At least one
Output 3.2. Citizen security policies incorporate new agendas –
gun regulation and organized crime – innovative approaches and 
renewed monitoring strategies, with focus on gender-based 
violence and community organization.
Indicator 3.2.1. Percentage of trust in police institutions
Baseline (2018): 59
Target (2025): 65
Output 3.3. Reconfiguration of the social protection system 
incorporates a systemic approach, embodying gender and 
generational disparities, with special focus on social security 
reform.
Indicator 3.3.1: Average retirement benefit gender gap
Baseline (2019): 37%
Target (2024): 30%
Output 3.4. Public policies incorporate new accountability 
frameworks to protect those furthest behind through integrated 
and holistic responses including nature-based solutions, 
promoting autonomy, fostering inclusion and empowerment and 
enforcing non-discrimination.
Indicator 3.4.1. Application of Multidimensional Vulnerability 
Index at national and subnational levels
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): At least once
Uruguayan Agency for 
International 
Cooperation
Ministry of Social 
Development
Ministry of Labour and 
Social Security
Ministry of National 
Defense
Ministry of Education 
and Culture
Ministry of Health 
Institute for Childhood 
and Adolescence
National Institute for 
Women
National Institute for 
Employment and 
Professional Formation
National Institute for 
Youth
United Nations 
organizations
Academia
Civil society
Other: $55,405Data source / frequency: UNDP / annual
Indicator 3.4.2. Application of Multidimensional Well-being 
Index at national and subnational levels
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): At least once
Data source / frequency: UNDP / annual
Indicator 3.4.3. Number of reports on affirmative legislation 
compliance regarding vulnerable communities (particularly 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex, Afrodescendant and disabled populations).
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 5
Data source / frequency: UNDP / annual