File Name: UZB-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Uzbekistan
Country Code: UZB
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1 to 4 February 2021
Start Year: 2021
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
1 December 2020
Original: English
2016150X (E) 040121
First regular session 2021
1 to 4 February 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Uzbekistan (2021–2025)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Uzbekistan (2021–2025)…………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Uzbekistan made steady progress over the past decades, but inequalities persist. One 
of the two double landlocked countries in the world, Uzbekistan is a lower-middle-income1
economy with high human development2and the largest population in Central Asia.3In recent 
years, the country experienced steady growth, gradually diversified its economy, and reduced 
the poverty rate from 24 per cent in 2000 to 11 per cent in 2019,
4
lifting 2.2 million people 
out of poverty. However, regional inequalities are increasing, while the urban-rural poverty 
gap remained at nearly 6 per cent in 2018.
5
2. Uzbekistan today is experiencing a unique development momentum, having 
embarked on ambitious reforms since early 2017 that have impacted every aspect of social, 
political and economic life. The Government’s vision to transform Uzbekistan into an 
industrialized, upper-middle-income country by 20306enjoys popular support.
7 Structural 
reforms and trade liberalization since 2017 are encouraging increasing financial flows, 
including from the international financial institutions (IFIs). Uzbekistan can reap a 
demographic dividend from its large young population (57 per cent are below 30 years old)
through productive employment opportunities, encouraging economic initiative and 
innovation, and strengthening future work capabilities and digital skills. Job creation has not 
kept pace with GDP and population growth – over 600,000 job seekers enter the labour 
market every year.8 Coupled with serious deficiencies in education quality at all levels, this
results in high unemployment, especially among the young.
9
3. Accountable, transparent, modern and inclusive governance and rule of law 
institutions are preconditions for achieving the development vision of Uzbekistan. The 
country has been making significant investments to bring public services closer to the 
population.
10 The Government is committed to further increasing the efficiency, scope and 
quality of services, while addressing challenges posed as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
including non-interoperability of platforms, poor data connectivity, and low digital literacy.
Uzbekistan recently took important steps towards gender equality by adopting laws on equal 
rights/opportunities for women and men and gender-based violence. A woman currently 
chairs the Senate, while women’s representation in Parliament doubled from 16 to 32 per
cent in the 2019 elections (Central Asia’s highest and above the global 24 per cent average11). 
However, challenges persist, with gender-based violence, segregation of women in the labour 
market, property ownership disparities, and gender roles directed by traditional values.
12 The 
Government implements wide-ranging reforms to prevent and fight corruption in order to 
maintain trust in public institutions, attract investments and improve access to justice while 
improving the country’s standing in the Corruption Perception and Rule of Law Indexes.13
Legal improvements brought 2019 elections ‘closer to international standards’14 and key steps 
have been taken to enhance freedom of speech, promote human rights, citizen engagement 
and participation in national and regional legislative oversight processes. 
1 Gross national income per capita was $2,020 in 2018 (https://databank.worldbank.org/reports.aspx?source=world-development-indicators).
2 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2019.
3 https://unstats.un.org/home.
4 Goskomstat (http://nsdg.stat.uz).
5
Ibid.
6 https://regulation.gov.uz/ru/document/8839-kontseptsiya_kompleksnogo_sotsialno_ekonomicheskogo_razvitiya_respubliki_uzbekistan_do_2030_goda.
7 http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/834051595427687698/L2CU-COVID19-impacts-June2020-en.pdf. 
8 World Bank, Uzbekistan Growth and Job Creation: An In-depth Diagnostics. 2019.
9 Youth (18 to 30 years old) not in employment, education or training (NEET) is 42 per cent, women 66 per cent (http://nsdg.stat.uz/goal/11).
10 https://medium.com/usaid-2030/e-justice-system-in-uzbekistan-proves-its-worth-amid-covid-19-d0ffb2928765. 
11 https://data.ipu.org/women-ranking?month=5&year=2020.
12 http://www.fao.org/3/ca4628en/ca4628en.pdf.
13 Uzbekistan ranks 153 out of 180 countries in the 2019 Corruption Perception Index and 92 out of 128 countries in the 2020 Rule of Law Index.
14 https://www
oscepaorg/documents/election-observation/election-observation-statements/uzbekistan/statements-31/3944-2019-parliamentary-3/file4. Increasing population and urbanization in Uzbekistan require sustainable use of 
nature while limiting climate impacts that decouple growth from carbon emissions and 
curbing unsustainable consumption and production patterns. The energy intensity of 
Uzbekistan is among the world’s 10 highest15 and its inefficient energy use costs at least 4.5 
per cent of GDP annually.
16 While the country’s urbanization rate17 rises, risk-informed 
investments for clean, efficient, inclusive and resilient cities need to be pursued. Eighty per
cent of Uzbekistan water comes from outside the country, creating water shortage
vulnerabilities, worsened by climate change.
18 Land degradation, soil salinization, reduced 
water quality, wind and water erosion, and decreased productivity of arable land are the 
country’s major environmental concerns. The poorest population lives in arid regions and 
depends on subsistence agriculture. Therefore, it is vulnerable to climate change and natural 
resource availability, exacerbated by high risks of natural and human-induced disasters. The 
Aral Sea’s disappearance is a reminder of the importance of water management and 
sustainable resource use.
5. The COVID-19 pandemic threatens to derail the ambitious transformation of 
Uzbekistan and reverse two decades of growth. Between 1.3 and 2.6 per cent of the 
population, around 0.4–0.88 million people, may have fallen into poverty due to COVID19,
19 with the most vulnerable (youth, women, informal workers and migrants, people living 
with disabilities, the elderly) experiencing significant hardship.20 The pandemic especially 
impacted women, causing reduced livelihood opportunities, higher exposure to poverty,
inequalities and gender-based violence.21 Since March 2020, about 85 per cent of small 
businesses have closed. The pandemic has underlined the country’s remaining structural 
issues, including inefficiently modernized social protection and health governance systems, 
a large unprotected informal sector, and gaps in digitalization, particularly in the public 
sector. The need for a green, gender-equal, good governance framework, as a basis for 
recovery, has become even stronger.
6. Even before the COVID-19 crisis, the transformation of Uzbekistan required 
innovative approaches and strong coherence in policymaking, backed with diversified 
funding. The crisis has reinforced the need to avoid proliferation of insufficiently integrated 
(cross)-sectoral reforms and to establish an integrated national financing framework for 
development, enabling appropriate financing from all sectors, reinforced with high-quality 
data for evidence-based policymaking.
22
7. Overall, the outcome of the reform agenda will be determined by success in 
generating tangible improvements in people’s daily lives, including for the most 
vulnerable groups, and therefore in addressing the overarching development challenge 
identified by the United Nations common country assessment (CCA) – the threat of growing 
exclusion and inequalities. Achieving a ‘just, equal and resilient society’ and long-term high, 
sustained and inclusive economic growth is feasible if structural economic reforms are 
backed by public administration investments, advancement of rule of law, human rights,
gender equality, and sustainable natural resource use and environmental management. This 
is the overarching vision of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF), and these are precisely the areas in which UNDP will assist 
Uzbekistan.
8. UNDP is well positioned to support Uzbekistan in capitalizing on its unique 
development momentum and accelerating its transformation. The integrated country 
15 Uzbekistan records 0.45 kg of CO2 emissions per United States dollar of GDP (versus the world average of 0.27 kg) (http://hdr.undp.org/en/data).
16 http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/810761468318884305/pdf/ACS41460WP0Box0Issues0Note00PUBLIC0.pdf. 
17 Currently at 50 per cent, expected to reach 60 per cent by 2030, CCA.
18 UNDP, Mainstreaming Water and Transboundary Issues, 2020.
19http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/834051595427687698/L2CU-COVID19-impacts-June2020-en.pdf.
20 Ibid.
21 https://www.unwomen.org/-/media/headquarters/attachments/sections/library/publications/2020/policy-brief-theimpact-of-covid-19-on-womenen.pdf?la=en&vs=1406. 
22 UNDP
"Development finance assessment”2020programme evaluation (ICPE) and other recent reviews23 highlighted that UNDP, as a trusted 
partner, has strategically supported the transformation of Uzbekistan, played a catalytic role 
in promoting sustainable economic growth, supported Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) nationalization and established an multi-sector approach to mitigate human security 
risks for affected communities in the Aral Sea region. UNDP has promoted women’s rights 
and contributed to improving access to justice and public services, encouraging more 
transparency and participation in policymaking. UNDP presence at local and national levels 
has helped to connect policies to solutions of scale, bringing coherence of reforms horizontally 
across government ministries/agencies, and vertically across national and subnational 
government. Its regional offices in Nukus (Aral Sea region) and Namangan (Fergana Valley) 
give UNDP a capacity unique among development partners. UNDP will continue building
on these strengths, while addressing key ICPE recommendations and lessons learned from 
evaluations to overcome portfolio fragmentation, enhance programme coherence, and ensure 
more systematic use of data.
9. The unique UNDP integrator role of the United Nations development system24 and
its focus on innovation bring additional comparative advantage in identifying and 
facilitating integrated cross-sectoral/thematic, multidimensional solutions to the 
complex development challenges of Uzbekistan. UNDP will play its dual ‘integrator’ and 
‘innovator’ roles while contributing to the three strategic priority areas of the UNSDCF, 
2021-2025, across four intended outcome areas (see section II below). Under the overall 
coordination of the United Nations Resident Coordinator, the UNDP approach will include a 
combination of: 
(a) Provision of integrated policies and solutions based on UNDP technical leadership in 
specific areas, such as UNDP lead in preparation and upgrading of the multilateral 
COVID-19 socioeconomic response and recovery offer, inclusive of specific 
accelerators for better recovery (green recovery and digitalization). In supporting the 
preparation of the national poverty reduction strategy, UNDP will help assure that it
reflects perspectives of the broader United Nations, IFI and development community
with integrated policy solutions. Similarly, UNDP will leverage its technical leadership
in several governance areas (rule of law and human rights, anticorruption, parliamentary 
and electoral development) and work with other United Nations entities – the United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the Office of the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) – and development partners (such as the 
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) on joint programmes and 
advocacy initiatives to accelerate comprehensive reforms. 
(b) A systemic, portfolio approach to deal with interdependent social, economic and 
environmental issues. This will be applied by the SDG integration initiative in addressing 
the long-standing challenges of the Aral Sea region and supporting its transformation
into a zone of ecological innovation and new technologies.
(c) Platforms to catalyse partnerships, knowledge and resources. UNDP will lead the 
United Nations effort (with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World 
Health Organization, and others) to support establishment of an integrated national 
financing framework (INFF) and alignment of COVID-19 response with the SDGs. 
(d) Innovation, accelerating learning, experimentation and integrated solutions to complex 
issues across programme interventions, using the unique profile of the accelerator lab to 
innovate at scale, while helping Uzbekistan to recover forward better from the COVID19 pandemic.
23 ICPE Uzbekistan, 2020; UNDAF, 2016-2020, final evaluation; the midterm review of the United Nations joint programme on Aral 
Sea region, 2018; the final evaluation of e-government promotion for improved public service delivery, 2017; and the midterm review 
of sustainable water management in rural areas, 2018.
24 United Nations General Assembly resolution 72/279
paragraph 3210. The new programme will be strongly anchored in the national Sustainable 
Development Goals framework.
25 UNDP will place more emphasis on enhanced policy 
coherence, through support to the bi-cameral Parliamentary Commission on the SDGs and 
support the elaboration and implementation of a long-term national poverty reduction 
strategy and its financing framework. Given the extreme uncertainty caused by COVID-19, 
investing in data at scale is essential.
26
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11. UNDP will support Uzbekistan to achieve a modern democratic society driven by 
responsive governance systems, future-ready human capital and an inclusive green 
economy. Guided by the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, the Decade of Action, the 
UNSDCF and the extensive multi-stakeholders consultations conducted during its 
elaboration at national and subnational levels, UNDP will support Uzbekistan to harness 
systems innovation, advance and finance economic and social transformation, create new and 
better opportunities for its people, and help revive, improve and sustain environmental 
ecosystems over time. In the next 18 months, UNDP will support Uzbekistan in overcoming
the COVID-19 crisis while over the entire programme period the UNDP offer will centre on 
four outcome or ‘flagship’ areas, consistent with the UNSDCF,
27 each backed by signature
solutions of the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021.
12. Flagship area 1: In the UNSDCF strategic priority area, “Effective governance and 
justice for all”, UNDP will support the Government in developing accountable, 
transparent, inclusive policies, gender-responsive institutions and expanded civic 
participation aimed at ensuring provision of public services that meet the needs of all 
the people of Uzbekistan. UNDP will contribute towards: 
(a) Strong and inclusive institutions. UNDP will support partners in making choices that 
build social capital and open civic space to lay the foundations for a new social contract, 
based on rule of law, governance and human rights.
28 UNDP will support the 
Government’s anticorruption efforts and advanced rule of law, including modernization 
of the court system in line with international human rights standards, as preconditions
for success of economic reforms. Partnering with UNODC and the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), UNDP will closely cooperate with 
the national Inter-Agency Commission, the General Prosecutor’s Office, the Ministry of 
Justice and the newly established Anti-Corruption Agency.
(b) Enhanced effectiveness and inclusiveness of public services, with a strong focus on 
digital transformation to benefit all members of society. Jointly with the European Union
and the Agency for Public Service Delivery, UNDP will support reviewing local 
governance systems, reengineering business processes and introducing new digital 
governance systems29, closing the gap in public service access, while delivering critical 
government services remotely, including health care. UNDP will lead United Nations
efforts – with UNODC, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO) and the Peacebuilding Fund – to pilot integrated solutions for 
inclusive service delivery, expanded engagement of youth and women in local decisionmaking, and advanced social cohesion to protect and fulfil human rights in regions with 
pockets of vulnerability and possible risks of tensions (including in the Fergana Valley). 
Targeted measures will be developed to support victims of domestic violence and 
enhance the quality of services for people living with disabilities and people living with 
25 With six national SDGs and 127 targets, SDG nationalization report (https://lex.uz/ru/docs/4013358).
26 UNDP, Beyond Recovery. A Leap into the Future, 2020.
27 UNSDCF outcomes 1, 2, 3 and 5 while contributing to outcome 4.
28 Aligned with the national human rights strategy.
29 Decree on digital transformation
strategy for innovative developmentHIV.30 Within a regional programme, including Central Asia, jointly with other United 
Nations entities, UNDP will help prevent radicalization and violent extremism.
(c) Stronger electoral and parliamentary development with enhanced roles and 
accountability, together with the Central Electoral Commission, the Parliament, the 
United Nations Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and other 
development organizations (such as OSCE). Together with other United Nations entities,
UNDP will focus on the key pillars of democracy, participation, voice and freedom of 
expression – electoral system and Parliament – to strengthen checks and balances and
elevate legislative and oversight roles of the Parliament, including on attaining the SDGs.
13. Flagship area 2: Within the same UNSDCF strategic priority area, “Effective 
governance and justice for all”, UNDP will promote new ways of understanding and 
addressing poverty and inequalities, and policy coherence and financing for 
development aligned with the national SDGs, and will contribute towards:
(a) Poverty reduction. Jointly with the World Bank and other development actors, UNDP 
will support the Government’s efforts to reduce inequalities by establishing a long-term 
vision built on a whole-of-society approach that integrates interrelated areas, including
job creation, strengthening social protection, enhancing human capital capabilities, and 
developing a resilient society. UNDP will also help assess how the reforms affect the 
most vulnerable and recommend action to assure they benefit and are protected from 
potential negative impact.
(b) Policy coherence and the integrated national financing framework. UNDP will lead 
support for the establishment of an INFF, in close cooperation with the IFIs and United 
Nations organizations to enhance policy coherence and alignment of public and private 
sources of financing. Based on experience of other countries (Indonesia), new, 
innovative finance sources (Islamic finance/green sukuk, social bonds, crowdfunding, 
risk financing) will be explored when piloting social and green initiatives to benefit the 
vulnerable in rural areas and the Aral Sea region.
14. Flagship area 3: In the UNSDCF strategic priority area, “Inclusive human capital 
development leading to health, well-being and resilient prosperity”, UNDP will promote 
policies for resilient and inclusive growth as well as enhanced capabilities and better 
opportunities, with the goal of improved access to livelihoods, decent work and enabling 
opportunities in two areas:
(a) Innovative policies for resilient and inclusive growth will be explored to address regional 
income and public service disparities, while advancing an enabling environment for 
green, decent jobs and entrepreneurship. Together with the International Labour 
Organization (ILO), UNDP will work on models for expanded digitalization for women, 
innovative and inclusive business initiatives in rural areas, including better access to 
finance. It will focus on women/youth-run start-ups, small and medium enterprises, in
regions with multiple vulnerabilities. Jointly with UNDP in other Central Asia countries, 
subregional climate-resilient development in the Fergana Valley will be supported, for 
enhanced climate-fragility risks and natural resource management31UNDP will also 
support Uzbekistan to strengthen participation in institutions of global economic 
governance and integration into world and regional economy on equal and beneficial 
basis: accession to the World Trade Organization and cooperation with neighbouring 
countries and regions. 
30 Including through United Nations system-wide youth and disability inclusion strategies.
31 https://www
osceorg/files/f/documents/b/7/355471pdf(b) Enhanced capabilities and better opportunities for women, youth and people from rural 
areas. UNDP will focus on NEET (not in education, employment or training) youth and 
women in the informal economy, building on the COVID-19 socioeconomic response 
and recovery offer,32 by supporting the Government to address skills-mismatches, 
promote digital economy, and future-proof jobs through technologies and innovation, as 
well as ensuring improved links between social protection schemes and employment 
measures. In this context, UNDP will aim to expand its partnership with the Ministry of 
Employment and Labour Relations, Chamber of Commerce and Industry, IT Park and 
ILO.
15. Flagship area 4: In UNSDCF strategic priority area, “Sustainable, climateresponsible and resilient developments”, UNDP will support Uzbekistan to step up its 
agenda on climate change and nature-based solutions, pursuing structural 
transformations towards green growth, in three areas:
(a) Climate change adaptation and mitigation. UNDP will support Uzbekistan in expanding 
its nationally determined contribution (NDC). UNDP will also assist in mobilizing
partners to leverage and catalyse the necessary finance so that Uzbekistan implements 
NDC priorities and moves towards carbon neutrality. With Green Climate Fund support, 
UNDP will facilitate development of specific gender-sensitive climate change adaptation 
plans for health, agriculture, water, emergencies and housing sectors, and the three most 
environmentally degraded regions, ensuring adaptation and mitigation responses are 
embedded in recovery efforts. UNDP will direct its support to specific targets of the 
National Strategy on Transition to a Green Economy by 2030 – reducing emissions by 
increasing energy efficiency, enhanced use of renewable energy, improving resource 
efficiency and crop yields, and avoiding land degradation.33 UNDP will support the 
development of new energy efficiency solutions, including investing in low-cost energyefficient rural housing through blended financing opportunities with Islamic and Asian 
development banks, and enhancing access to clean and affordable energy. 
(b) Effective and sustainable management of natural resources promoted through 
conservation policies. In line with the 2019-2028 National Strategy on Biodiversity 
Conservation, UNDP will further advocate for sustainable ecosystem management, as 
well as preservation and regeneration of mountain ecosystems, wetlands and desert 
ecosystems in the Aral Sea region. Jointly with the European Union, UNDP will help the 
Ministry of Agriculture address inefficient agricultural practices that pose serious threats 
to rural livelihood sustainability, ultimately contributing to an inclusive transition to a 
‘green’ economy in the agri-food sector.
(c) Strengthened gender-responsive climate and disaster risk governance systems through 
enhanced multi-hazard early warning. UNDP, together with the United Nations Office 
for Disaster Risk Management, will support the Ministry of Emergency Situations Center 
for Hydrometeorological Services (Uzhydromet) and regional administrations in 
implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction through gendersensitive early-warning systems to climate-induced hazards, and sharing the Uzbekistan 
experience in this area at subregional and global levels. With the Stockholm Convention 
ratified by Uzbekistan, UNDP will also help formulate a national persistent organic 
pollutants action plan to identify priority action for hazardous waste.
(d) Systems innovations for integrated solutions in the Aral Sea region. UNDP will help 
establish a multifaceted approach to addressing the Aral Sea region’s long-standing 
challenges. It will support efforts of the Karakalpakstan Council of Ministers, the 
32 Consolidated multilateral COVID-19 socioeconomic response and recovery offer, April 2020.
33 https://regulation
govuz/ru/document/3997Ministry of Investment and Trade, the Ministry of Innovation, the Ministry of 
Environment and others to transform the Aral Sea region into a zone of ecological 
innovation and technology. This UNDP engagement will set the basis for broader United 
Nations contributions, introducing an approach that explores systems design, data and 
analytics, alternative financing, innovation, and integrated policies.
16. UNDP will advance gender equality and women’s empowerment across all abovementioned areas, by supporting implementation of the National Gender Equality Strategy. 
Ongoing partnerships with the Ministry of Mahalla and Family Affairs, the Senate’s Gender 
Commission, and civil society organizations will be further expanded to support initiatives 
to promote women’s economic empowerment, women’s participation in public leadership, 
women's rights, and ending harmful practices and gender-based violence. Close cooperation 
with civil society in building youth and women’s agency for greater responsibility, voice and 
accountability will be key in the delivery of the programme.
III. Programme and risk management 
17. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed 
in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
18. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in coordination with other 
United Nations organizations. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. UNDP will leverage 
expertise more effectively, connecting to its Global Policy Network, facilitating regional 
dialogues and South-South cooperation to share the experiences of Uzbekistan. UNDP will
apply a portfolio-based approach while delivering its programme and ensure appropriate 
business processes and office structures are in place.
19. UNDP will exercise joint ownership of the programme with the Ministry of Economic 
Development and Poverty Reduction and the National Coordinating Authority. The 
Government and UNDP have agreed that the provision of UNDP support services (for 
national implementation), as required, would not involve a separate letter of agreement. 
20. Nurturing partnerships and mobilizing resources will remain a key priority for UNDP.
Reflective of the country’s middle-income status and changing donor landscape, UNDP will
prioritize Government financing and further deepen partnerships with IFIs and development 
banks, towards accelerated reforms and innovative public and private financing for the SDGs.
UNDP will continue expanding engagement with the European Union, vertical funds and 
bilateral donors, as well as enhance joint resource mobilization with United Nations entities
through United Nations pooled funds.
21. The programme’s successful implementation may be affected by the following risks:
(a) With the changing donor landscape, the biggest risk for UNDP delivery of results at 
speed and scale is its ability to mobilize resources. UNDP will manage this risk by 
diversifying its strategic partnerships, blending its work with IFIs, business and nongovernment sector, targeting new development financing, and applying innovative 
programming instruments. If funding does not fully materialize, UNDP and the Government will revise programme targets and interventions to meet resource 
availability.
(b) With the country’s ambitious transformative agenda, there is the risk that reforms
will prioritize industrialization and economic growth only, with limited 
consideration of impacts on vulnerable groups and SDGs. To manage these risks, 
UNDP will apply risk-informed development assessments and horizon-scanning 
across all areas and maintain project-specific and portfolio-level risk logs and 
contingency plans, systematically applying UNDP social and environmental 
safeguards and accountability mechanisms.
(c) (iii) Weakened policy coherence, lack of integrated approach to development 
financing and insufficient data for evidence-based policymaking may pose 
impediments to UNDP’s work. Much of these will therefore be supported by the 
proposed programme.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
22. Outcome and output indicators derive from the national SDG framework and global 
UNDP integrated results and resources framework (IRRF), carefully selected for efficient 
monitoring. UNDP will actively track progress towards planned results and identify emerging 
opportunities and risks through continuous adjustment, including through United Nations
results groups. UNDP will continue relying on evaluations for programming decisions, 
focusing on outcome-level evaluations to further strengthen the application of an integrated, 
issues-based approach. UNDP will invest adequate resources and enhance quality assurance 
and monitoring and evaluation capacity.
23. Systematic data collection, including through periodic United Nations common country 
analyses will be further promoted. UNDP will continue strengthening national capacities for 
enhanced SDG monitoring and data collection with the State Statistics Committee, 
mainstreaming it throughout programme implementation. Annex. Results and resources framework for Uzbekistan (2021-2025)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Action Strategy 2017-2021: Improving system of state and public construction, ensuring rule of law and reforming judicial system. 
UNSDCF OUTCOME: By 2025, all people and groups in Uzbekistan, especially the most vulnerable, demand and benefit from enhanced accountable, transparent, inclusive and genderresponsive governance systems and rule of law institutions for a life free from discrimination and violence.
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS/ 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME (in 
United States dollars)
Corruption Perception Index value 
(National SDG 16.5.1.3)
Baseline (2019): 153/180
Target (2025): TBC
Order and Security Index
(National SDG 16.1.4.2)
Baseline (2019): 94/126
Target (2025): TBC
Women’s representation in national 
parliament
(National SDG 5.5.1)
Baseline (2018): 16
Target (2025): TBC
Transparency International, 
annually/programme
World Justice Project, 
annually/programme 
State Statistics Committee
(Goscomstat), 
annually/programme
Output 1.1: Institutions equipped with effective anticorruption tools, enabled to expand access to justice
and enhance social cohesion
Indicator 1.1.1: Level of implementation of OECD 
anticorruption network’s recommendations 
Baseline (2020): 0% 
Target (2025): 80% 
Source, frequency: OECD reports/biannually
Indicator 1.1.2: Proportion of the population accessing ejustice services, sex-disaggregated 
Baseline (2020): 20% (including 38% women)
Target (2025): 30% (including 48% women)
Source, frequency: Supreme Court reports, annually 
Output 1.2: Digitalized and inclusive people-centred 
public service delivery models promoted
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of services provided through 
my.gov.uz and public service centres
Baseline (2019): 2.84 million/6.39 million
Target (2025): 15 million/60 million 
Source, frequency: my.gov.uz, Agency for Public Services, 
annually
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of people accessing basic services, 
disaggregated by target groups (poor, women, people 
living with disabilities, youth, other marginalized groups)
Baseline (2019): 11,314,000 (including through 
my.gov.uz) public services have been provided during 
2019 
Target (2025): 20 percentage point increase
Source, frequency: Agency for Public Services, annually
Ministry of Justice
General Prosecutor’s Office
Presidential Administration 
Supreme Court 
Agency for Public Services
Local Governments 
Ministry of Health 
Ministry of Mahalla and Family 
Affairs
Youth Union
Central Electoral Commission
Parliament, civil society 
organizations
United States Agency for 
International Development 
(USAID), European Union, the 
Peacebuilding Fund, the SDG 
Fund, the Government of Japan, 
UNICEF, UNODC, UNESCO, 
OHCHR, OSCE, United Nations 
Department of Political and 
Peacebuilding Affairs
Regular: $2,700,000
Other: $54,776,949Indicator 1.2.3: Number of HIV-infected people with 
access to antiretroviral treatment, sex-disaggregated (IRRF 
1.1.2.1)
Baseline (2020): 33,000 (M:50% / F:50%) 
Target (31/12/2024): 49,000 (M:50% / F:50%) 
Source, frequency: the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria
Indicator 1.2.4: Number of legal acts and policies adopted 
to establish or strengthen national infrastructures for peace 
and social cohesion
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2025): 2 
Source, frequency: Government reports/annually
Output 1.3: Electoral and parliamentary processes and 
institutions strengthened to promote inclusion, 
transparency and accountability (modified IRRF 
2.2.2.2)
Indicator 1.3.1: Share of parliamentarians with enhanced 
capabilities in law-making, oversight and policy analysis 
(disaggregated by age and gender)
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 50%
Source, frequency: Parliament reports, annually
Indicator 1.3.2. Share of policy initiatives addressing needs 
of underrepresented and marginalized groups, consulted by 
Parliament with interested groups
Baseline (2020): 0; Target (2025): 30%
Source, frequency: Parliament reports, annually
Indicator 1.3.3: Extent to which Central Electoral 
Commission has capacity to conduct inclusive and credible 
elections (IRRF 2.2.2.1) 
Baseline (2020): 2
Target (2025): 3
Source, frequency: Election observer assessments 
(2022/2025)NATIONAL PRIORITY: State policy on economic development and poverty reduction.
UNSDCF OUTCOME: By 2025, the population of Uzbekistan benefits from more harmonized and integrated implementation of the reform agenda due to strengthened policy coherence, 
evidence-based and inclusive decision-making and financing for development, mainstreamed in line with national SDGs.
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Primary government expenditures as a 
proportion of original approved budget, 
by sector (NSDG16.6.1) 
Baseline (2018): 128%
Target (2025): TBD
National statistical legislation 
consistent with the fundamental 
principles of official statistics 
(National SDG 17.18.2)
Baseline (2018): no
Target (2025): yes
Statistical capacity indicators
Baseline (2018): 54.4/100
Target (2025): TBD
Ministry of Finance, 
Goscomstat and the World 
Bank
Output 2.1: Effective SDG financing framework 
developed and promoted through coherent genderresponsive, evidence-based policy implementation, 
innovative financing and coordination platform
Indicator 2.1.1: Existence of integrated national financing 
framework aligning the 2030 Agenda with financing 
streams
Baseline (2020): No 
Target (2025): Yes
Source, frequency: Government report, annually
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of innovative financing solutions 
and practices designed and institutionalized
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 3
Source, frequency: Government report, annually
Output 2.2: Cross-cutting and comprehensive reform 
agenda developed through lenses of poverty and 
inequality reduction with integrated monitoring 
framework in line with the SDGs. 
Indicator 2.2.1: Official measurement of monetary and 
multidimensional poverty is available
Baseline (2020): No 
Target (2025): Yes
Source, frequency: South-South cooperation, annually
Indicator 2.2.2: Poverty reduction strategy in line with the 
national SDG framework developed and adopted
Baseline (2020): No 
Target (2025): Yes
Source, frequency: Government reports, annually
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Economy
Ministry of Development and 
Poverty Reduction 
State Statistics Committee
Capital Market Development 
Agency
The SDG Fund, the Government 
of the Russian Federation, United 
Nations organizations, the World 
Bank, IMF, the Islamic 
Development Bank 
Regular: $712,000
Other: $8,912,656 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Action Strategy 2017-2021: Economic development and liberalization/development of social area.
UNSDCF OUTCOME: By 2025, youth, women and vulnerable groups benefit from improved access to livelihoods, decent work and expanded opportunities generated by inclusive and 
equitable economic growth.
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions.
Proportion of youth (aged 16–24 
years) not in training or 
employment (National SDG 8.6.1)
Goscomstat Output 3.1: Women, youth and people from remote 
rural areas benefit from better skills, sustainable 
jobs and strengthened livelihoods
Ministry of Labour and 
Employment
Chamber of Commerce and 
Regular: $730,000
Other: $9,703,351Target: TBD
Unemployment rate, sexdisaggregated
(National SDG 8.5.2)
Baseline (2019): 9% 
(12.8% female, 6.1% male)
Target (2025): 7.5% (10% female, 
5.5% male) 
Poverty level 
(urban/rural)/National SDG 1.2.1
Baseline (2018): 11.4% (Urban/
8.4%, Rural/14.3%)
Target: TBD
Percentage difference between 
average monthly earnings of 
female and male employees to 
average monthly earnings of male 
employees (National SDG 8.5.1) 
Baseline (2018): 38.6%
Target: TBD
Growth rates of household 
expenditures and income per capita 
among the bottom 40% of the 
population and the total population 
(National SDG 10.1.1)
Baseline (2018): 
118.5%, 127.1%
Target: TBD
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of decent jobs created with 
UNDP support, including share of women, youth
Baseline (2020): Total – 160 (40% women, 50% youth) 
Target (2025): Total – 5,000 (50% women, 50% youth)
Source, frequency: UNDP, annually
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of people who gained 21st
century skills due to UNDP support (women, youth)
Baseline (2020): 400 (30% women, 80% youth)
Target (2025): 20,000 (40% women, 80% youth)
Source, frequency: UNDP, annually
Output 3.2: Public institutions and private entities 
have improved capacities to design and implement 
innovative policies for inclusive, resilient economic 
growth and reduced regional inequalities
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of companies benefiting from 
improved business advisory support (including led by 
women, youth)
Baseline (2020): 750
Target: 1000 (30% women-led, 25% youth-led)
Source, frequency: UNDP/CCI reports
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of public servants with 
improved capacities in developing and applying policies 
prioritizing the circular and green economy
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 200
Source, frequency: UNDP reports/annually
Indicator 3.2.3: Number of gender-responsive policy, 
legal, regulatory and institutional measures adopted with 
UNDP support to improve enabling environment for 
micro, small and medium enterprises
Baseline (2020): 3/year
Target (2025): 6/year
Source, frequency: UNDP/annually
Youth Union
Ministry of Investment and 
Trade
Business associations
IT Park
Government of the Russian 
Federation, ILO NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Action Strategy 2017-2021, Strategy for transition of the Republic of Uzbekistan to a green economy for 2019-2030, Government of Uzbekistan 
concept on environmental protection until 2030.
UNSDCF OUTCOME: By 2025, most at-risk regions and communities of Uzbekistan are more resilient to climate change and disasters, and benefit from increasingly sustainable and 
gender-sensitive efficient management of natural resources and infrastructure, robust climate action, inclusive environmental governance and protection.
UNDP STRATEGIC PLAN, 2018-2021, OUTCOME: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
Proportion of electricity generated 
from renewable energy sources in 
total electricity generation 
(National SDG 7.2.1)
Baseline (2018): 9.4%
Target (2025): 20%
Energy intensity measured in terms of 
primary energy and GDP 
(National SDG 7.3.1)
Baseline (2018): 0.164
Target (2025): 0.105
Proportion of agricultural land with 
water-saving technologies 
Baseline (2018): 1.7%
Target (2025): 20%
Proportion of protected mountain 
ecosystems in their total area
(National SDG 15.4.1)
Baseline (2018): 1.8% 
Target (2025): TBD
Proportion of land with high salinity 
Baseline (2018): 45% 
Target (2025): 41%
Number of deaths, missing persons 
and injured directly as a result of 
disasters per 100,000 population, 
disaggregated by regions, sex and 
age (National SDG 1.5.1)
Baseline (2018): 2.7% 
Target (2025): TBD
Direct economic losses due to 
disasters as percentage of GDP
(National SDG 1.5.2) 
Baseline (2018): 0.005%
Target (2025): TBD
Goscomstat
Ibid
Ibid
Ministry of Water Resources 
State Committee for Ecology 
and Environment Protection 
Ministry of Agriculture
Ministry of Emergency 
Situations
Output 4.1: Innovative and sustainable climate change 
adaptation and mitigation initiatives designed and 
implemented
Indicator 4.1.1: Number of sectoral/regional/national 
gender-sensitive climate change initiatives implemented
Baseline (2020): 3 
Target (2025): 5
Source, frequency: Sectoral/national/regional reporting, 
annually
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of people who invested in lowcarbon housing (gender and location disaggregated) 
Baseline (2020): 1,329 (50% female, % rural) 
Target (2025): 2,000 (55% female, % rural)
Source, frequency: National mortgage banks, annually
Indicator 4.1.3: Number of passengers / days using green 
urban transport corridor with electric public buses 
Baseline (2020): 0
Target (2025): 3,000 (50% female) in Tashkent City
Source, frequency: Tashkent City Municipality, annually
Output 4.2: Enhanced capacities for sustainable use of 
terrestrial and water ecosystems promoted through 
conservation policies 
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of national/regional initiatives to 
strengthen government capacities to fulfil international 
obligations
Baseline (2020): 2
Target (2025): 5
Source, frequency: Sectoral reporting, annually
Indicator 4.2.2: Montreal Protocol on 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFC)/Kigali amendment on 
HCFCs implemented
Baseline (2020): No
Target (2025): Yes
Source, frequency: Goscomecology, annually
Indicator 4.2.3: Proportion of the protected areas of total 
Cabinet of Ministers, 
State Committee for Ecology and 
Environment Protection
Ministry of Emergency 
Situations
Ministry of Water Resources
Ministry of Agriculture
Ministry of Innovations 
Development 
Council of Ministers of 
Karakalpakstan 
Uzhydromet
Vertical funds
FAO, UNESCO, UNFPA, United 
Nations Environment Programme, 
BIOFIN 
IFIs, the European Union, 
Government of Japan,
Regular: $1,800,000
Other: $36,106,270Baseline (2020): 4.64%
Target (2025): 12%
Source, frequency: Goscomecology, annually
Indicator 4.2.4: Smart patrol system introduced and 
operational in all protected areas 
Baseline (2020): No
Target (2025): Yes
Source, frequency: UNDP reports, annually
Output 4.3: Integrated gender-responsive climate and 
disaster risk governance systems strengthened through 
enhanced multi-hazard early warning (MHEWS) and 
rapid recovery
Indicator 4.3.1: Number of national/regional initiatives to 
strengthen government capacities to meet international 
commitments
Baseline (2020): 7
Target (2025): 22
Source, frequency: Ministry of Emergency Situations, 
annually 
Indicator 4.3.2: Number of people with increased resilience 
due to access to MHEWS information, genderdisaggregated 
Baseline (2020): n/a
Target (2025): 3 million people (50% women)
Source, frequency: UNDP reports, annually
Output 4.4: Systems innovations advanced for 
integrated solutions in the Aral Sea region
Indicator 4.4.1: Number of innovative and scalable 
solutions applied through systems integration 
Baseline (2020): 3
Target (2025): 8
Source, frequency: UNDP reports, annually 
Indicator 4.4.2: Number of new project proposals 
improving access to water and food.
Baseline (2020): 2 
Target (2023): 4
Source, frequency: UNDP reports, annually