File Name: VCT-NEP-2009-EN
Year: 2009
Country Name: St Vincent and the Grenadines
Country Code: VCT
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2009
Start Year: 2009
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

St. Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) 
Sustainable Energy for SVG: 
The Government's ational Energy Policy 
March, 2009 Content 
1 Guiding Principles of the National Energy Policy ...................................................................1 
2 Rationale for a National Energy Policy....................................................................................2 
2.1 Global perspective .............................................................................................................3 
2.2 Regional setting.................................................................................................................4 
2.3 Energy Situation in SVG ...................................................................................................6 
3 Policies and Goals ...................................................................................................................8 
3.1 Planning and Management...............................................................................................10 
3.2 Power Sector ...................................................................................................................10 
3.3 Renewable Energy...........................................................................................................11 
3.4 Petroleum Sector .............................................................................................................12 
3.5 Transportation .................................................................................................................14 
3.6 Energy Efficiency ...........................................................................................................15 1 Guiding Principles of the National Energy Policy 
The Government of SVG recognizes that energy plays a major role in the diversification efforts of 
the country's economy and in the pursuit of poverty reduction; 
The following guiding principles have been considered during the preparation of the National 
Energy Policy for St. Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG): 
• Guarantee a clean, reliable and affordable energy supply to customers; 
• Strengthen the national economy by reducing the dependence on import of fossil fuels; 
• Stabilize and possibly reduce the energy consumption per capita in the medium and long 
term; 
• Reduce the dependence on import of energy through continued and expanded exploitation of 
indigenous resources and improvement of energy efficiency and/or conservation of energy 
use; 
• Liberalize the energy market by encouraging and accommodating private sector 
participation in energy development and energy services, thereby enhancing 
competitiveness and engendering lower prices; 
• Take advantage of renewable, local energy resources, wherever this is possible from the 
aspects of availability (potential), energy demand, technical and social implications, 
economic feasibility, ecological harmony and sustainability; 
• To always encourage and stimulate the efficient use of all energy resources, keeping in mind 
that all types of energy are either scarce or need significant amounts of capital to be tapped 
or transposed into applicable forms of energy use; 
• In all its decision making with respect to energy services development, the Government will 
strongly promote the active participation of the energy sector, the general public, NGOs, etc. 
• In delivering energy services, government will minimise subsidies to consumers and set 
prices and tariffs in such in way that they timely reflect full cost but taking into account 
ways to relieve the price burden on the lowest income households; 
• Take advantage of national expertise and know-how as far as possible for the development 
and delivery of energy services. Where importation of resources is required, provide 
incentives for the use of the most available technology; 
• Ensure that the measures taken in pursuing this energy policy is in line with the 
requirements and legal implications of the Caribbean Single Market Economy (CSME). 2 Rationale for a National Energy Policy 
2.1 Global perspective 
1. Average world oil prices in every year since 2003 have been higher than the average 
for the previous year. Prices in 2007 were nearly double the 2003 prices in real terms. Prices 
rose further into the third quarter of 2008, peaking at $147 per barrel in mid-July, when they 
were well above the historical inflation-adjusted record price for a barrel of oil set in the 
early 1980s. 
2. The spot price of WTI1
 crude oil increased from US$122 per barrel in June 2008 to 
US$145 per barrel in July 2008, in part because of perceptions of tenuous supply in several 
of the major exporting countries, By August 2008, the price fell back to less than US$120 
per barrel. WTI prices, which averaged US$72 per barrel in 2007, are projected to average 
US$119 per barrel in 2008 and US$124 per barrel in 2009. 
 
1
 WTI – West Texas Intermediate, type of crude oil that is used as benchmark for oil pricing. 3. A variety of factors have caused oil prices to increase, including strong demand 
growth in non-OECD Asia and the Middle East, no growth in production since 2005 from 
the members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), rising costs 
for oil exploration and development, across-the-board increases in commodity prices, and a 
weaker U.S. dollar. 
4. The 2006 edition of International Energy Outlook2
 and World Energy Outlook 
project that by the year 2030 total primary energy demand will increase by over 50%. In 
particular, increased international demand for oil and natural gas is directly attributable to 
burgeoning consumption in countries like China and India, where the use of oil and gas has 
increased at an average rate of 8% per annum over the last three years. The International 
Energy Agency (IEA) expects global demand for oil to grow by 41% by 2030. 
5. How supply will keep with this demand is unknown: the IEA in its World Energy 
Outlook 2006 stated that “the ability and willingness of major oil and gas producers to step 
up investment in order to meet global rising demand are particularly uncertain.” The risk of 
supply failure is growing. The current and urgent challenge confronting the international 
community is the identification of plausible ways to maintain reasonable energy prices, 
mitigate the adverse effects of high petroleum prices, minimize fossil fuel supply 
 
2
 Energy Information Administration / US Department of Energy, International Energy Outlook, June 2006 disruptions, lower the increase in consumption of fossil fuels and minimise climate change 
effects stemming from greenhouse gas emissions as well as design the energy supply in such 
a manner that it is environmentally and socially sustainable and allows access to modern 
energy services for all mankind. 
6. Consumption of petroleum products globally has fuelled environmental concerns 
particularly as they relate to climate change. The smaller island states of the Caribbean are 
only minor contributors to greenhouse effects through the release of CO2, but are vulnerable 
to sea level increase and changes in climate conditions, such as lower precipitation and a 
higher occurence and intensity of hurricanes. Several international conventions such as the 
Kyoto Protocol, attempt to secure commitments to reduce global emissions from energyrelated activities. In parallel, there have been important technological advances designed to 
minimise adverse environmental impacts. 
2.2 Regional setting 
7. The Caribbean Community consists of developing small island States and low lying 
coastal States, all of which exhibit unique and peculiar characteristics, including, inter alia, 
varying topographies, limited natural resources, small populations and fragmented markets 
with different energy product specifications. 
8. CARICOM countries consume approximately 240,000 boepd3
 and approximately 
95% of this amount is derived from fossil fuels. With the exception of Trinidad and Tobago 
and to a lesser extent Belize,4
 CARICOM countries are essentially net importers of crude oil 
and refined products, largely from extra-regional sources. Specifically, CARICOM Member 
States source petroleum products from Trinidad and Tobago (PETROTRIN), Curacao 
(PDVSA), and more recently Puerto Rico (Shell), and St. Croix (Hovensa). Table 1 
illustrates CARICOM’s Petroleum Demand and Supply Balances as at 2006. 
 
3
 boepd = barrels of oil equivalent per day 
4
 Belize recently began exporting crude but still imports refined products.  
9. Owing to increasing international demand for petroleum and rising petroleum prices, 
CARICOM countries are grappling with critical issues relating to security of supplies and 
pricing and transportation arrangements for petroleum products traded in the region. With a 
view to ameliorating the deleterious economic effects of high petroleum prices, many 
CARICOM States have availed themselves of support available from Trinidad and Tobago’s 
Petroleum Stabilization Fund implemented in July 2004, and the Energy Co-operation 
Agreement (PETROCARIBE) signed in June 2005. As adumbrated in the Energy Cooperation Agreement, the primary purpose of the PETROCARIBE arrangement is to 
contribute to the social and economic development of Caribbean countries, through the 
principles of integration outlined in ALBA5
. 
10. In June 2005, eleven (11) CARICOM Member States6
 signed the Energy Cooperation Agreement (PETROCARIBE), while so far nine (9) CARICOM Member States7
have signed bilateral agreements with Venezuela. With respect to the Trinidad and 
Tobago’s Petroleum Stabilization Fund, TT$750 million (US$ 125 million) of grant funds 
have been disbursed as at the end of December 2006.
11. With respect to the refining capacity of the CARICOM region, there are three 
 
5
 Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas. 
6
 Eleven Members of CARICOM signed the Framework Agreement - Antigua and Barbuda, The Bahamas, Belize, 
Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, Suriname, Saint Lucia, St. Kitts and Nevis and St. Vincent and the
Grenadines 
7
 Nine Members signed bilateral agreements - Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica, 
Suriname, St. Kitts and Nevis and St. Vincent and the Grenadines refineries with a total capacity of 202,000 bpd8. The total expenditure for planned refinery 
upgrade projects for all 3 refineries has been projected to exceed US$1.5 billion. In light of 
the scarce resources available to the Governments of the region for economic development, 
opportunities exist for integration or rationalization of regional refining industry and 
production capacities in the energy sector. 
12. Currently, a CET9
 of 10% to 20% is applied on petroleum products imported from 
extra-regional sources. Products originating from refineries within the CARICOM Single 
Market (CSM) and imported crude oil are zero rated. At the Seventeenth Inter-Sessional 
Meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community, the 
Heads “welcomed the expression of willingness of Trinidad and Tobago to facilitate 
PETROCARIBE and to support the application for suspension of the Common External 
Tariff by Member States when made to the COTED10” 
13. In 2006 CARICOM implemented the CSM, with plans for the CARICOM Single 
Economy (CSE) to come on stream in 2008. With a view to achieving one of the principal 
CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME) objectives of accelerated, co-ordinated 
and sustained economic development and convergence, it is incumbent upon Member States 
to secure adequate energy supplies; increase renewable energy sources; ensure 
environmental protection, and promote measures for solidarity among Member States in 
times of energy crises. 
2.3 Energy Situation in SVG 
14. St. Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) is a multi-island state comprising the main 
island of St. Vincent and seven smaller inhabited islands with about 30 uninhabited islets 
and cays constituting the Grenadines. Together, they occupy a total landmass of 388 km2
. 
The estimated population of SVG is approximately 110,000 people, with less than 100,000 
of those living on the main island St. Vincent. 
 
8
 bpd = barrels per day 
9
 CET = Common External Tariff 
10 Summary of Recommendation and Conclusions of the Seventeenth Inter-Sessional Meeting of the Conference of 
Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, 9-10-February 200615. SVG is heavily dependent on imported petroleum products for electricity generation, 
transportation, cooking, and other energy requirements. SVG has an energy mix with more 
than 96% petroleum base and about 3% hydro power. All islands except St. Vincent depend 
entirely on diesel generation for their electricity supply. 
16. SVG’s state-owned utility VINLEC is the sole provider of electricity to the main 
island St. Vincent, and the Grenadines islands of Bequia, Union Island, Canouan, and 
Mayreau. The company operates diesel and small hydro power stations on mainland St. 
Vincent, while the Bequia, Union Island, Canouan and Mayreau islands are completely 
reliant on diesel powered systems. The other Grenadines islands are supplied by privately 
owned electricity systems on the basis of diesel plants. 
17. Almost half of the electricity delivered is consumed by the domestic sector, while the 
commercial sector (includes the public consumption for hospitals, schools, administration 
buildings etc.) is in a very close second position. Industry and street lighting are of minor 
importance. 
18. SVG has substantial renewable energy sources to provide for heat (solar thermal, 
biomass) and electricity (wind, geothermal, hydro, and solar) and possibly fuel (biomass). 
Those resources can cover larger shares of the energy needs as this is presently not taking 
place. While the use of hydro power for electricity generation has a long-standing tradition, 
the active tapping of solar energy for hot water production is of recent nature. Both 
technologies are mature and competitive. 
19. According to preliminary studies elaborated with assistance from the German 
Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) within the Caribbean Renewable Energy 
Development Programme (CREDP) further potential exists for additional hydro power 
exploitation through rehabilitation and expansion of existing plants and development of new 
sites. The conservatively estimated unused hydro power potential is in the range of 5 – 10 
MW, namely from the rivers of Wallilabou and Bucament. 
20. The use of solar collectors for hot water production is already wide-spread and mainly common on larger domestic buildings. To date all collectors are imported models, 
mainly brought in from Barbados. It is obvious that the installation of such appliances could 
be further extended to ensure that all hot water needs are covered by solar energy. This 
refers mainly to private households which currently use other means of hot water generation, 
but also and in particular to all larger consumers of warm water, such as hospitals, hotels 
and restaurants. 
21. There is considerable wind energy potential mainly on the eastern side of St. Vincent 
and Bequia and on all of the smaller islands. Traditionally, wind power has been utilized in 
the past for grinding of grains. 
22. With assistance form CREDP/GTZ, potential wind sites for small wind parks have 
been identified. Since September 2005, VINLEC records wind data at a site at Brighton. The 
measured mean wind speed of the first nine months is above 8 m/s in 10 m height indicating 
even higher wind speeds in 40 to 50 m, which is the average hub height of a standard wind 
turbine suitable for St. Vincent. Another wind measurement tower has been put into 
operation at Ribishi Point close to the landfill site in March 2007, recording wind speeds and 
directions at 10m and 30m height. 
23. Biomass resources are currently mainly exploited in a non-sustainable manner 
through the use of charcoal. There are no known biogas plants or other applied technologies 
that make use of biomass resources in a modern way. The potential to extract oil from 
coconuts or other seeds (like Jatropha – also known as Barbados nut in the region) and use 
this oil either in its pure form or transfer it into biodiesel has so far not been examined. 
3 Policies and Goals 
3.1 Planning and Management 
The growing importance being accorded to energy issues necessitates the need to ensure that there 
is the ability to effectively plan and manage the national energy sector so as to assist in reducing the uncertainty in decision making for the public and private sector. Through this policy Government 
will strengthen its capacity to formulate, implement and monitor energy policies and programmes in 
a coordinated manner. 
For this task to be fulfilled effectively it is essential that the database on all relevant aspects of the 
energy sector is complete and consistent and continuously kept up-to-date. In addition, the 
implementation of the National Energy Policy and the coordination of individual actions require an 
appropriately staffed designated authority within the Government and it may be necessary to create 
and develop new sections and add new staff positions within the public and private sector. 
The goal for planning and management in the energy sector is: 
Efficient and well-coordinated planning and management activities to achieve 
sustainable supply and use of energy. 
Policies 
3.1.1 Ensure that energy planning and management addresses the efficient and sustainable use and 
management of imported and natural energy sources 
3.1.2 Improve, expand and maintain a database on all energy-relevant aspects 
3.1.3 Improve decision-making and encourage more effective co-ordination of energy sector 
planning and management 
3.1.4 Promote the delivery of efficient and cost-effective energy services 
3.1.5 Designate an authority with adequate resources within the Government that is responsible 
for the National Energy Policy and coordinates its implementation with the various 
Government Departments 3.1.6 Create appropriate staff positions within VINLEC and other state-dependent institutions in 
order to implement the National Energy Policy 
3.1.7 Provide educational programmes relating to energy sector issues, including in particular 
conservation, efficiency and use of renewable energy sources 
3.1.8 Elaborate (and regularly update) an Action and Implementation Plan detailing potential 
energy sources and technologies, timescales and investments required to service SVG’s 
growing energy demand in a sustainable manner 
3.1.9 Ensure that international funding and technical assistance is made available and the energy 
policy is developed within the context of regional approaches and objectives. 
3.2 Power Sector 
Reliable and affordable electricity is essential for the economic and social development of Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines. Key issues include increasingly high costs for imported fuel and the 
option to use cost-efficient natural resources, such as hydro, wind, solar and geothermal energy. 
Further problems arise from the country-wide inexperience of using such resources, the partially 
inefficient generation of electricity with older diesel and hydropower schemes and the inefficient 
consumption of electricity. 
The goal for the power sector is: 
Safe, efficient, reliable, affordable and environmentally friendly electricity 
generation and supply for all parts of St. Vincent and the Grenadines. 
Policies 
3.2.1 Improve the efficiency of power production, transmission and distribution to optimise costs 
and fuel consumption 3.2.2 Promote sound energy efficiency and conservation practices for all consumers 
3.2.3 Explore the existing potentials of renewable energy sources for electricity generation 
3.2.4 Support the introduction of new commercially proven generation technologies that are 
environmentally, economically, financially and socially viable 
3.2.5 Access imported fossil fuels at lowest costs, respecting environmental concerns and supply 
security 
3.2.6 Establish mechanisms that allow for a fair access to the transmission/distribution grid and 
provide the basis for a stronger involvement of the private sector in electricity generation. 
3.3 Renewable Energy 
Indigenous Renewable Energy Sources (RES) in the form of solar, wind, hydro and geothermal 
provide the most appropriate long-term alternative sources to replace imported petroleum products 
for electricity generation and heat production in SVG. Key issues in renewable energy include a 
lack of technical expertise and relatively weak institutional structures that would allow public or 
private investors to tap such resources in a timely manner and secure environment. The current 
situation is further defined by insufficient knowledge about the RES potentials, lack of financial 
commitment and support to renewable energies as well as insufficient private sector participation 
and investment. 
The goal for renewable energy is: 
Increase the utilisation of renewable energy technologies on all islands of Saint 
Vincent and the Grenadines. 
Policies 3.3.1 Promote the increased use of appropriate renewable energy technologies, which are 
technically and commercially proven, financially and economically viable, and 
environmentally friendly. 
3.3.2 Analyze the potentials of renewable energy sources on all islands, make site-specific 
assessments and elaborate project proposals. 
3.3.3 Develop local expertise in the production, installation, operation, management and 
maintenance of technically and economically proven renewable energy systems. 
3.3.4 Encourage private sector participation in the development, financing and management of 
renewable energy projects. 
3.3.5 Design and initiate a national Renewable Energy education and awareness for all sectors of 
the civil society. 
3.3.6 Provide financial and fiscal incentives that allow Renewable Energy technologies to be 
market competitive, taking into account economical benefits from the use of such 
technologies. 
3.3.7 Investigate options and potential benefits from importing biofuels to Saint Vincent and the 
Grenadines. 
3.3.8 Consider the mandatory installation of solar thermal collectors for all major users of hot 
water. 
3.4 Petroleum Sector 
Importation of petroleum products, including LPG, accounts for a significant and steeply increasing 
proportion of total national imports of SVG. Moreover, they are fundamental to SVG’s socioeconomic development and will continue to be so for the foreseeable future. The maintenance of a 
reliable and cost-effective supply of petroleum products is essential. The cost of fuel imports per unit should be minimized through good supply contract negotiations 
and management. The overall volume of petroleum derivate imports should increase at a lower rate 
than economic growth through appropriate conservation and efficiency measures and by 
substituting the use of petroleum with renewable energies. 
A clean environment is crucial to the economic and social well-being of the people of SVG. 
Irresponsible use and handling of petroleum products can cause significant damage, particularly in 
fragile island coastal and marine environments. For this reason, the proper importation, handling, 
storage and use of petroleum products and management of waste petroleum derivates (mainly 
lubricants) is an important issue. 
The goal for the petroleum sector is: 
Safe, reliable and affordable supplies of petroleum products and its efficient and 
clean handling and use. 
Policies 
3.4.1 Ensure a secure and reliable supply of petroleum products at lowest import costs available, 
and conforming to agreed product standards and specifications 
3.4.2 Encourage fuel conservation and efficient end-use, thereby reducing dependence on imported 
petroleum products. 
3.4.3 Ensure that new and existing petroleum storage and handling facilities conform with standards 
approved for SVG. 
3.4.4 Ensure that adequate storage facilities for petroleum products are available throughout SVG at 
strategic locations. 3.4.5 Promote the collection, transportation, environmentally responsible re-use, disposal, or 
removal of waste oil and other petroleum by-products to minimize adverse impacts on soil, 
ground-water, and near-shore fisheries. 
3.5 Transportation 
Road, air and marine transport provide an essential service that enables economic and social 
development. The transportation sector in SVG consumes a large proportion of the imported 
petroleum products in the form of gasoline, diesel and aviation kerosene. Clearly the introduction of 
measures that conserve transports fuels and increase the efficiency of their use will have long-term 
economic and environmental benefits for SVG. 
The goal for transportation is: 
Efficient, environmentally clean and cost-effective transportation. 
Policies 
3.5.1 Improve fuel conservation and efficiency for the land and marine transport sectors 
3.5.2 Minimise the detrimental impact of petroleum product consumption in the transport sector 
on land, atmosphere and marine environment. 
3.5.3 Provide the basis and sufficient incentives for improvements of the public transport system 
as alternative to individual vehicle use. 
3.5.4 Improve road conditions and traffic management as to avoid congestions and prioritize 
public transport busses. 
3.5.5 Investigate consequences and benefits of substituting the use of gasoline by LPG for taxis. 3.5.6 Take adequate measures to minimize the import of outdated and high-consuming secondhand cars 
3.5.7 Introduce a taxation system that gives incentives for the use of fuel-efficient passenger cars 
and other vehicles 
3.5.8 Introduce regular motor check-ups to avoid unnecessary emissions and limit the fuel 
consumption to the lowest possible level. 
3.6 Energy Efficiency 
Energy efficiency is a cross-cutting issue that touches the generation and consumption of electricity 
as well as the use of fuel in the transport sector. From society’s perspective, achieving greater 
energy efficiency generally requires less investment than does new generation, and also means less 
energy-related environmental impact. From an individual’s perspective, it can mean significant 
savings over the long term. However, despite the obvious benefits, there has historically been a lack 
of energy-efficiency initiatives in SVG. 
The goal for energy efficiency is: 
Minimized energy input and lowest possible energy intensity for all energyrelated services 
Policies 
3.6.1 Promote energy audits for key energy consuming sectors, such as industries, hotels, 
restaurants and public buildings 
3.6.2 Provide fiscal incentives for the import of energy-efficient appliances 
3.6.3 Strengthen consumer information on purchase and use of energy-efficient appliances 3.6.4 Carry out studies on consumption patterns in different sectors to be used in the design of 
appropriate energy-efficiency measures 
3.6.5 Raise the general awareness about energy efficiency among the civil society, e.g. by 
organizing regular energy weeks 
3.6.6 Establish standards for the insulation of new buildings that will be equipped with airconditioning systems 
3.6.7 Consider further fiscal measures in respect of incandescent light bulbs. 
3.6.8 Continue the grant of fiscal incentives for the use of energy-saving light bulbs. 