File Name: VNM-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Viet Nam
Country Code: VNM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 31 January–4 February 2022
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
2 December 2021
Original: Language
2117854X (E) 061221
First regular session 2022
31 January–4 February 2022, New York
Item 6 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam
(2022-2026)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Viet Nam (2022-2026) ..................................................... 9I. UNDP within the Cooperation Framework
1. With more than three decades of uninterrupted economic growth, Viet Nam has made 
impressive advances towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (the Goals) 
and improving the quality of life for millions of people. Multidimensional poverty has
fallen from 8.23 per cent in 2016 to 4.8 per cent in 2019, with another 5.6 per cent of the 
population categorized as vulnerable to multidimensional poverty. For the first time in 
2019, Viet Nam moved into the high human development category, ranking 117 out of 189 
countries, with a Human Development Index value of 0.704.1
2. Despite significant gains, income, gender, regional and urban-rural inequalities persist. 
The Gini coefficient was at 0.373 in 2020.
2 Poverty rates in the Northern Midlands, 
mountains and the Central Highlands, where most ethnic minority people live, are between 
14.4 and 11 per cent, considerably higher than the national average of 4.8 per cent.
3 Viet 
Nam is among the top 10 countries4 most affected by natural disasters. Its dependence on 
fossil fuels and degradation of its environment and biodiversity undermine opportunities 
for sustainable economic development. 
3. The gender development index has improved to 0.997, and Viet Nam is ranked 65th
globally,5 but challenges persist. Women made up 30 per cent of representatives at the 15th
National Assembly (June 2021), compared to the target of 35 per cent set in 2018 by Party 
Resolution 26-NQ/TW. Women make up 60 per cent of the agricultural labour force.6
Between 2011 and 2020, over 90 per cent of victims of trafficking were women, and 80 
per cent belonged to ethnic minority groups.
7 The prevalence of disability among women 
is approximately 1.5 times higher than among men.
8
4. Those most at risk of being left behind include ethnic minority groups, especially 
women, poor and near-poor people living in disaster-prone areas; youth and marginalized
populations, including people affected by HIV; persons with disability; sexual and gender 
minorities; and migrants. Nationwide, 47 percent of Vietnamese households have access 
to the Internet, but this proportion falls to 15 percent among ethnic minority households 
and 16 per cent among persons with disability.
9 COVID-19 has pushed already vulnerable 
people into transient poverty.
10 If not addressed promptly, this could lead to chronic 
poverty and growing inequalities.
5. UNDP will provide thought leadership on issues core to the achievement of the Goals, 
Paris Agreement and human development based on a jointly developed theory of change
underpinning the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework
(UNSDCF), which contributes to Viet Nam’s Socio-Economic Development Strategy 
(2021-2030) and Socio-Economic Development Plan (2021-2025).
6. As co-lead of the ethnic minorities working group, UNDP will work with United 
Nations organizations and other partners to facilitate monitoring of socioeconomic 
indicators on leaving no one behind and to promote policy dialogue. As technical lead on 
integrated national financing framework initiatives to operationalize the Addis Ababa 
Action Agenda, UNDP will work with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN Women) 
1 UNDP, Human Development Report 2020.
2 Viet Nam Household Living Standards Survey 2020.
3
Ibid.
4 Global Climate Risk Index 2021.
5 UNDP, Human Development Report 2020
6 United Nations and Oxfam Viet Nam, Gender Equality in Climate Change Adaption and Disaster Risk Reduction in Viet Nam, 2017.
7 Ministry of Public Security, 2021.
8 National Survey on Persons with Disabilities, 2016.
9 Ministry of Information and Communication, 2020/
10 UN Assessment of social and economic impact of COVID-19 in Viet Nam
2020and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to enhance investments for 
inclusive, green, environment-friendly growth. UNDP will work with the International 
Labour Organization (ILO), United Nations Population Fund and UNICEF on promoting 
a more inclusive, gender-sensitive and shock-responsive social protection system and 
application of multidimensional poverty measurements.
7. As co-chair of working groups on nationally determined contribution and climate 
change, energy efficiency and enterprises’ roles in disaster risk reduction, UNDP will 
coordinate contributions of partners. UNDP is leading a collaboration with the World 
Health Organization on the climate-health nexus to better understand and address the
impact of climate change on the health sector. Working with UNEP, UNDP leads on 
development of forest-free practices and promotion of green commodities. UNDP is the 
technical lead for the United Nations Partnership on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities. Along with UNICEF, it leads a joint initiative on access to justice, while 
also supporting the United Nations’ advisory function in public administration and 
anti-corruption.
8. UNDP will foster a green and inclusive economic rebound from COVID-19, 
ensuring growth within planetary boundaries. To help future-proof Viet Nam and aid its 
achievement of upper-middle-income status by 2035, UNDP will support the government 
to fast track its digital transformation objectives for the ‘fourth industrial revolution’ in a 
way that ensures that no one is left behind, drawing on complementarities with United 
Nations partners.
9. The 2020 independent country programme evaluation documented strong evidence of
UNDP’s position as a trusted development partner. The government has adopted UNDPsupported strategies to reduce multidimensional poverty, focusing on employment 
generation for vulnerable groups. Significant contributions were made to the design and 
implementation of an improved and comprehensive social protection system. UNDP has 
demonstrated the use of development solutions to reduce the impact of humanitarian crises, 
for example, through climate-resilient housing, which withstood the 2020 typhoons. To aid 
implementation of new anti-corruption legal provisions, UNDP has supported the 
government to improve institutional accountability and engaged with partners for better 
downstream monitoring. 
10. Based on the evaluation’s recommendations, this country programme will continue to 
focus on promoting synergies across projects to enhance UNDP’s contribution to 
improvements at policy level and real change on the ground. Along with providing capacity 
support to the government, UNDP will develop a coherent strategy to engage on 
governance reform to improve accountability mechanisms and strengthen gender responses 
across outcome areas.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
11. This country programme document is based on wide-ranging national consultations. 
It derives from and contributes to the Goals and the UNSDCF (2022-2026). It is directly 
aligned to Viet Nam’s national plans and the UNDP Strategic Plan (2022-2026). The 
UNSDCF outcome areas are (i) inclusive social development (ii) climate change resilience 
and sustainability, (iii) shared prosperity and (iv) governance and participation. 
12. UNDP’s programme aims to support the government to accelerate achievement of the 
Goals, guided by the UNDP Strategic Plan’s three outcomes as discussed below. It is
enhanced by the three enablers: strategic innovation, digitalization and development 
financing. Based on its comparative advantage and global institutional capacities, UNDP 
will contribute to UNSDCF outcome areas ii, iii and iv. 13. Consolidating the results of and lessons learned from past programmes, UNDP will 
support government with capacities for anticipatory, adaptive and agile (triple AAA11) 
responses to complex and emerging challenges by: (a) evidence gathering and analysis to 
address new forms of multidimensional poverty, keeping nature and environment at the 
heart of economic development; (b) inclusive, human-centric digitalization and innovation;
(c) reframing policy choices and enabling shifts to address systemic gaps; (d) testing and 
scaling up successful implementation models; and (e) developing platforms to improve 
fiscal planning and mobilization of resources. 
14. The 2020 quadrennial comprehensive policy review underlined the importance of 
collaboration among United Nations entities to deliver integrated solutions. Accordingly, 
UNDP will contribute to the governance architecture of the UNSDCF, working jointly 
towards financing for the 2030 Agenda, improving data on the Goals, reducing genderbased violence, advancing the rights of persons with disability and improving disaster
response and preparedness. Along with partner United Nations organizations, UNDP will 
provide the evidence, tools, methodologies, policy expertise and innovative solutions to 
accelerate the achievement of UNSDCF outcomes. 
15. Across outcome areas, UNDP will support the government’s commitment to 
international integration, augmenting capacities to derive benefits from South-South 
and triangular cooperation through policy research, international exchange and 
partnerships that empower local actors, transform systems and leverage digitalization.
Towards this end, UNDP will leverage the Global Policy Network and extensive countryto-country sharing through the Accelerator Labs Network.
Outcome area 1: Shared prosperity through sustainable economic transformation
16. The theory of change underpinning interventions supporting outcome area 1 is that if
domestic firms achieve higher value addition, scale and competitiveness; if policies for 
generating more productive and sustainable employment through development of domestic 
firms, including micro, medium-size and small enterprises, especially in rural areas and 
through economic empowerment of women, are made effective; if enhanced development 
investments and policies facilitate the adoption of modern, green technologies and digital 
tools for an inclusive transition to the fourth industrial revolution; then progress will be 
made towards reducing multidimensional poverty, eradicating hunger and achieving 
inclusive, sustainable economic transformation based on innovation, entrepreneurship, 
enhanced productivity and competitiveness. (This will contribute to achievement of Goals
5, 8-10, 12 and 17; signature solutions 1 and 6 will be applied.)
17. To promote higher productivity and competitiveness of domestic firms as a means of 
avoiding the middle-income trap and achieving more inclusive growth, UNDP will support 
realization of the innovation priorities of the country’s Socio-Economic Development Plan. 
These include enhancing investment in research and development, applying new 
technologies and improving connections with domestic firms in domestic and global value 
chains. Under government leadership, evidence-based policy options will be provided for 
improving the national innovation system and initiating new entrepreneurial state 
approaches. UNDP will support the development feasible options and mechanisms to 
promote integrated, outcome-oriented financing to achieve national targets and to enhance 
capacity to monitor progress.
18. Systemic changes are needed to prevent low-middle income households — especially 
migrant workers in the informal sector — from falling back into poverty in the aftermath 
of COVID-19.
12 UNDP will contribute to making social assistance programmes inclusive
and responsive to gender issues and shocks, through evidence-based policy advice based 
on its international experience. Support will be provided for better targeting using the 
11 UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2026.
12 UNDP
Viet Nam Rapid Assessment2021vulnerability approach, and for transparent management and timely delivery of cash 
transfers for social protection through nationwide application of digital tools. 
19. Reducing multidimensional poverty in ethnic minority areas at a rate double the 
national average is a priority in Viet Nam’s strategy for leaving no one behind. UNDP will 
support national targeted programmes in designing regulatory frameworks and guidelines 
especially tailored for women in ethnic minority areas, assisting them to test new solutions 
and scale up successful ones. These will include e-commerce and e-payment experiments
to maximize engagement of ethnic minority women in value chains. UNDP will test 
incentive structures that encourage social impact businesses to operate competitively, 
especially in the post-pandemic context. Multi-stakeholder engagement platforms will be 
established to support micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, especially those run by 
members of disadvantaged groups, to strengthen market linkages. This will improve their
capacity to generate more productive and sustainable employment especially for the most 
vulnerable. 
Outcome area 2: Climate change, disaster resilience and environmental sustainability
20. The theory of change underpinning interventions under outcome area 2 is that if
gender-responsive and inclusive disaster resilience and climate change adaptation are
enhanced, if low carbon development and climate change mitigation are accelerated, if
environmental pollution is reduced, if biodiversity conservation and sustainable natural 
resource management are strengthened, and if green recovery from COVID-19 and green 
production and consumption practices are applied widely, then the integrity of natural 
ecosystems will be restored and better managed for planetary health and the achievement 
of sustainable development. This will contribute to achievement of Goals 1, 3, 5, 7, 11, 12, 
13, 14 and 15; signature solutions 1, 2, 4 and 5 will be applied.
21. Based on UNDP’s comparative advantage in addressing integrated sustainability and 
the poverty-environment and climate-health linkages, UNDP will contribute to enhancing 
climate and environment governance; reducing poverty and vulnerability; and responding 
to climate and disaster-related risks, persistent organic pollutants, degradation of 
biodiversity and ecosystems, desertification, land degradation, plastics and ocean pollution
and adverse health impacts. UNDP will empower poor and vulnerable people, especially 
women and ethnic minorities, to improve their resilience and access livelihood 
opportunities. UNDP support will increase institutional capacities for planning that reflects 
climate and disaster risk and for application of nature-based solutions, climate-resilient 
agricultural practices, tools to manage climate and disaster risks, and adaptive measures in 
the health sector; and to ensure resilience in housing and infrastructure development.
22. UNDP will contribute to improving capacities and policies on disaster risk 
management and resilient recovery from events resulting from natural and human causes 
as well as epidemics. The emphasis will be on measures to protect rights, especially for 
vulnerable groups. To improve monitoring of progress in developing capabilities, UNDP 
will support countrywide capacity assessment using the government’s provincial disaster 
management indicators. UNDP will enhance collaboration with the private sector on 
disaster risk reduction by establishing business networks for resilience and introduction of 
risk transfer solutions, such as insurance. 
23. UNDP will support the government, the private sector (particularly micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises) across outcomes 1 and 2 and financial institutions to design and 
implement low-carbon development, circular economy and environmental protection. The 
aim is to work together to achieve green growth and targets in the nationally determined 
contribution. In support of a more decarbonized economy, resources will be deployed to 
develop and implement energy-efficient business models, expanding use of clean and 
renewable energy. UNDP will demonstrate scalable solutions for deforestation-free cash 
crops, green agriculture supply chains, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and derisked low carbon investments for industrial processes. To meet the transparency requirements of the Paris Agreement, UNDP will support partners to strengthen systems 
and build capacities and tools to measure and report on emissions, mitigation, adaptation 
and climate financing.
24. The emphasis on a green recovery from COVID-19 will include developing
sustainable production and consumption strategies by raising awareness and applying
science and technology, including through the principles of circular economy. New product 
designs will be developed for certain industrial sectors to reduce waste, particularly marine 
plastic, and the use of hazardous chemicals. UNDP will work with new and existing 
partners to promote solutions and practices that are people centred, gender responsive and
sustainable in natural resources management, biodiversity conservation and communitybased tourism. A landscape approach will be applied for conservation of terrestrial and 
marine ecosystems. Using its comparative advantages, UNDP will explore sustainable 
financing mechanisms for biodiversity conservation, especially for protected area 
management.
25. Across outcomes, considering the possibilities of increasing risk accumulation, UNDP 
will introduce the following approaches: (a) corrective risk management to address and 
reduce existing and identified risks, (b) prospective risk management to avoid the 
accumulation of new risks and (c) compensatory risk management to strengthen resilience. 
These strategies will also contribute to implementation of the national adaptation plan, 
national strategy on climate change 2021-2050 and Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction. 
Outcome area 3: Governance and access to justice
26. The theory of change underpinning interventions under outcome 3 is that if institutions
become more innovative, responsive and transparent; if opportunities for participation are
enhanced, especially for women, youth and vulnerable groups; if the rule of law, access to 
justice and access to information are further strengthened; if gender equality improves at 
all levels; if programmes and laws for protecting the rights of vulnerable groups are 
implemented to ensure no one is left behind; if increases in digitalization increase equitable 
access to services; if triple AAA governance approaches are applied to prevent and respond 
to complexities and uncertainties; then Viet Nam can move closer to being a modern, just, 
safe and inclusive society based on improved governance and sustained peace. This will 
contribute to Goals 5, 10 and 16; signature solutions 2, 3 and 6 will be applied.
27. Equitable access to justice will be strengthened by reinforcing legal aid services at the 
local level that are gender sensitive and disability inclusive, and by enhancing capacities
of justice institutions. UNDP will support better implementation of Viet Nam’s 
international human rights commitments by improving domestic laws and monitoring the 
implementation process more effectively. Strategies for legal empowerment of poor and 
disadvantaged people will be explored to ensure that access to justice improves the 
effectiveness of strategies for reduction of poverty and elimination of discrimination and 
gender-based violence. People-centred approaches will be adopted for digitalization of 
services, including in the justice sector. Alternative dispute resolution mechanisms will be 
supported in partnership with relevant agencies and organizations, an important tool to 
reduce court caseloads.
28. Mechanisms to improve transparency, public engagement and accountability, 
including through participation of women and other vulnerable groups, will be 
strengthened in partnership with the government, Fatherland Front,
13 mass 
organizations and academia. This will include building on the Accelerator Labs’ work to 
identify local innovators who can create user-centric and citizen-centric solutions.
Citizen satisfaction with government performance will be assessed by state agencies
13 A voluntary union of political organizations, socio-political organizations, social organizations and individuals representing all classes, social strata, 
ethnic groupsreligions and overseas Vietnameseand the provincial governance and public administration performance index (PAPI),
which has successfully evolved over the years. In addition, UNDP will design a 
governance innovation portfolio to support institutions to achieve national targets by 2025, 
supporting the work of all three outcome areas. 
29. UNDP will strengthen capacities of national institutions to lead and manage mine 
action functions to further reduce the impact of explosive ordnance on communities. UNDP 
will support inclusive and resilient local development and safe livelihoods with an 
emphasis on local governance planning and implementation of regulatory frameworks
based on international best practices. UNDP will promote triple AAA governance 
approaches that anticipate trends, adapt solutions to local conditions and respond with 
agility to improve human security, sustain peace and prepare for future crises. This will
contribute to all three outcome areas.
30. UNDP will support implementation of the country’s national strategy on gender 
equality (2021-2030), promoting women's leadership and participation. Investments in 
capacity-building to address gender inequality and discrimination will reduce the risk of 
losing previous development gains. To address human trafficking and safe migration, 
UNDP will work with partners to improve legal and policy frameworks, develop a 
stronger evidence base and strengthen regional cooperation. To ensure conformity with 
international commitments on disability issues, UNDP will support a participatory process 
for developing Viet Nam’s legal frameworks.
III. Programme and risk management
31. This country programme document outlines UNDP’s contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results 
alignment and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of 
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels are prescribed in the 
organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
32. The programme will primarily be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution 
may be replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to 
force majeure. Harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
33. As recommended in the 2020 evaluation, the country office will invest in results-based
management systems to better monitor and evaluate the programme and undertake course 
correction. UNDP will undertake initiatives to ensure programme quality, efficiency and 
effectiveness in the pursuit of development results, while minimizing risks and pursuing 
opportunities to maximize benefits to target groups, especially women and youth.
34. To mitigate risks of disasters and post-pandemic uncertainties, UNDP will develop a 
business continuity strategy and establish thresholds to trigger programme adjustments, 
including reallocation of resources. The risk of declining resources requires close 
monitoring. Accordingly, UNDP will work with government and other partners on the 
principle of mutual accountability to achieve the Goals by building institutional resilience 
and dynamic capacities to adapt to uncertainties and disruptions. Innovative programming 
instruments, such as the engagement facility, development services and joint programming 
instruments, will be deployed in addition to standard development projects.
35. The programme’s contingency planning will help to adjust to changes in 
circumstances, such as social and environmental issues and reduced funding, by modifying 
the theory of change, maximizing synergies, fine-tuning development interventions and selecting implementing modalities for rapid response. Consistent with the demands of this 
country programme, the country office will review its business processes to improve 
efficiency, sustainability and cost effectiveness, including a staffing structure with 
appropriate capacities. 
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. Based on evaluation recommendations, the monitoring and evaluation system will 
focus on outcome-level results. Project monitoring will take place frequently throughout 
the programme cycle, capturing changes at system and ground levels. Project-level 
performance indicators will be strategically defined, and frequent independent 
performance monitoring will be conducted. UNDP will adopt an issue-based portfolio 
approach, addressing issues from a systems perspective leveraging linkages across 
interventions and outcomes, through a mix of short-, medium- and long-term strategies.
37. In alignment with the UNSDCF and Viet Nam’s development goals, UNDP will use 
national data sources for reporting on results. To facilitate data collection and analysis for 
monitoring the country programme, the UNSDCF and the Sustainable Development Goals, 
UNDP will support efforts to strengthen national statistical systems and reinforce resultsbased processes along with United Nations partners. 
38. The theory of change and the results and resources framework will be adjusted as 
needed based on regular assessment of UNDP’s achievements and the political economy 
of the country. Third party evaluations, conducted as per corporate guidelines, will inform 
programme design and implementation.
39. Adopting a whole-of-office approach, at least 15 per cent of the budget will be invested 
in gender interventions and in advancing the gender seal initiative. The gender marker will 
be used to monitor expenditure and improve planning.
14 Three per cent of the budget will 
be earmarked for monitoring, quality assurance and communication of results. Monitoring 
will adopt inclusive means for real-time decision-making. Accessibility-related costs will 
be allocated to support persons with disability.
40. A multi-year research agenda will produce policy briefs, discussion papers and 
periodic reports, including reports on the Goals jointly developed with partners. A 
knowledge management strategy will be implemented to promote a culture of creating, 
sharing and leveraging knowledge for informed programming, communication and 
decision-making. A communication strategy will be implemented to advocate for the Goals 
and promote policy dialogue, including through regional and international thought 
leadership. 
14 UNDP
Gender Equality Strategy2018-2021DP/DCP/VNM/3
Annex. Results and resources framework for Viet Nam (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Improving and raising the quality of socialist-oriented market economy institutions, and addressing more effectively the relationship between the State, the market and the society
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 1 – By 2026, people in Viet Nam, especially those at risk of being left behind, will contribute to and benefit equitably 
from a more sustainable, inclusive and gender-responsive economic transformation based on innovation, entrepreneurship, enhanced productivity, competitiveness and decent work
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
Cooperation framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s)
Data source, frequency of 
data collection Indicative country programme outputs Major partners Estimated cost (USD)
Indicator 1.1: GDP per capita 
Baseline: $3,521 
Target: Sustained annual growth rate 
of 4%-4.5% 
Indicator 1.2: Proportion of 
vulnerable employment by sex
(modified Goal 8.3.1)
Baseline: 54.1%
Target: Decreasing about 1% per 
year 
Indicator 1.3: Unemployment rate 
Baseline: 2.48% 
Target: <3% 
Indicator 1.4: Labour productivity 
Baseline: $5,081
Target: Annual growth rate of 6.5%
Indicator 1.5: Human Development 
Index
Baseline: 0.704 (2019)
Target: >0.7 
Indicator 1.6: Multidimensional 
poverty rate 
Baseline: 4.5% 
Target: Decrease of 1%-1.5% per 
year
General Statistics Office
Human Development Report, 
UNDP (annual)
Labour force survey (annual)
Socio-Economic Report
(annual)
Human Development Report, 
UNDP (annual)
General Statistics Office
Output 1.1: Next-generation mechanisms to enable vulnerable groups, in 
particular poor people, ethnic minority women and people with disability,
to create and access sustainable jobs and improved livelihoods
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of regulatory frameworks that facilitate women from
ethnic minorities to develop innovative livelihood opportunities
Baseline: 3
Target: 5
Data source: Government reports on national targeted programmes 
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of functional multi-stakeholder platforms for stronger
market linkages and capacities of micro, small and medium-size enterprises
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Data source: Government reports on national targeted programmes
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of innovative solutions tested and applied to
incentivize sustainable social impact businesses
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Data source: Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI)
Output 1.2: Evidence-based policy options for sustainable, inclusive and 
gender-responsive economic transformation agenda and its financing
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of mechanisms available to promote outcome-oriented 
financing and enhanced monitoring of public investment effectiveness towards 
achievement of the national Sustainable Development Goal targets
Baseline: 2
Target: 4
Data source: Joint United Nations programme reports
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of reports of government-led national reviews of 
Sustainable Development Goal implementation (refer IRRF 1.1.3)
Baseline: 3 
Target: 7
• National Assembly 
agencies
• MPI
• Ministry of Finance
• Committee for Ethnic 
Minority Affairs
• Ministry of Labour, 
Invalids and Social 
Affairs (MOLISA)
• Ministry of Justice
• Provinces, ethnic 
minority women 
businesses, private 
enterprises, multi-partner 
platforms. 
• ILO
• United Nations Industrial 
Development 
Organization
• International 
Organization for 
Migration (IOM)
• UNICEF
• UN Women
• UNEP
• Research institutions, 
Fulbright University
• Embassy of Canada
• Sustainable Development 
Goals Fund
Regular:
$1,800,000
Other: $16,088,340Data source: Government reports 
Indicator 1.2.3: Number of policy options to accelerate productivity and 
competitiveness of domestic firms
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Data source: Government reports 
Output 1.3: Inclusive, gender-responsive and shock-responsive social 
protection systems expanded
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of social assistance programmes that apply digital selfregistration, verification and management for improving transparency, 
accountability and timeliness of service delivery (refer IRRF 1.2.1)
Baseline: 5 provincial programmes
Target: At least 2 programmes digitized nationwide
Data source: MOLISA
Indicator 1.3.2: Proportion of social assistance beneficiaries who receive cash 
transfers through digital means
Baseline: 3%
Target: 50% (disaggregated by gender)
Data source: MOLISA
Indicator 1.3.3: Number of innovative, shock-responsive and inclusive solutions 
for reforming social assistance policy and programme frameworks adopted
Baseline: 0
Target: 2 
Data source: MOLISA
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Effectively manage and use natural resources; enhance environmental protection and response to climate change; prevent, comba t and mitigate natural disasters
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 2 – People in Viet Nam, especially those at risk of being left behind, benefit from and contribute to a safer and cleaner 
environment resulting from Viet Nam’s effective mitigation and adaptation to climate change; disaster risk reduction and resilience building; promotion of circular economy; provision of clean and 
renewable energy; and sustainable management of natural resources
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
Indicator 2.1: Number of tonnes of 
CO2 equivalent emitted 
Baseline: 528.4 million tonnes 
Target: 673.3 million tonnes
Indicator 2.2: Forest area as a 
proportion of total land area 
Baseline: 41.89% 
Target: Baseline maintained 
Government reports to the 
United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate 
Change
Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development (MARD)
(annual)
Output 2.1: Innovative and resilience-building solutions introduced to 
reduce risks from disasters and climate change and health impacts for 
vulnerable people
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of women and men benefiting from UNDP’s support in 
the areas of disaster, climate and health 
Baseline: 120,689
Target: 768,500 (disaggregated by gender)
Data source: Government reports
Indicator 2.1.2: Provincial disaster management index 
• National Assembly 
• MARD 
• Ministry of Natural 
Resources and 
Environment (MONRE)
• MPI
• Ministry of Transport 
• Ministry of Construction
• 20 provincial peoples’ 
committees
Regular:
$4,628,000
Other: $60,216,185DP/DCP/VNM/3
Indicator 2.3: Hectares of marine 
protected areas and special use forest 
Baseline: Marine protected areas: 
213,000 hectares
Special use forest: 2.17 million
hectares
Target: Marine protected areas: 
270,271 hectares
Special use forest: 2,462,652 hectares
Indicator 2.4: Number of deaths, 
missing persons and injuries 
attributed to disasters per 100,000 
population
Baseline: 357 deaths, 876 injuries
Target: <250 deaths and injuries
Indicator 2.5: Renewable energy 
share of total final energy 
consumption
Baseline: 25% 
Target: 28% 
MONRE, MARD
(annual)
Department of Natural 
Disaster Prevention and 
Control (annual)
Ministry of Industry and 
Trade (annual)
Baseline: To be established15
Target: Score improved by an average 20-point increase in index score across 
the provinces
Data source: Viet Nam Disaster Management Authority
Indicator 2.1.3: Number of insurance products for rural and urban infrastructure 
(housing, health, education and businesses) against disaster impact 
Baseline: 0
Target: 2
Data source: Viet Nam Disaster Management Authority
Output 2.2: Policies and solutions designed and implemented for 
transformation to low-carbon development, circular economy and 
environmental protection 
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of tonnes of CO2 equivalent reduction from UNDPassisted interventions (including renewable energy, energy efficiency, forestry, 
agriculture) 
Baseline: 2,187,602 tonnes of CO2 equivalent
Target: 3,187,602 tonnes of CO2 equivalent
Data source: MONRE
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of UNDP-assisted businesses that demonstrate green 
production and reduction of environmental pollution
Baseline: 0
Target: 50 
Data source: Ministry of Industry and Trade, MoNRE
Indicator 2.2.3: Number of industrial sectors in which alternative product design 
is demonstrated for preventing the use of hazardous chemical additives and
persistent organic pollutants
Baseline: 2
Target: 5
Data source: Ministry of Industry and Trade
Output 2.3: Gender-responsive, sustainable and innovative solutions and 
practices in natural resources, biodiversity conservation and nature-based 
tourism adopted
Indicator 2.3.1: Number of hectares of forest and marine protected 
areas restored, created or under improved sustainable management practices
supported by UNDP (refer IRRF 4.1.2)
Baseline: Number of hectares of forests: 200,000
Number of hectares of marine protected areas: 8,600
Target: Number of hectares of forests: 1,000,000
Number of hectares of marine protected areas: 15,000
• Viet Nam Association for 
Small and Medium 
Enterprises
• Viet Nam Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry
• UN Women
• World Health 
Organization
• UNEP
• IOM
• European Union
• Norwegian Embassy
• Asian Development Bank
• German Agency for 
International Cooperation
• International Finance 
Corporation
• Global Environment 
Facility 
• Green Climate Fund Data source: MONRE, MARD
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of women and men benefiting from UNDP-assisted 
sustainable management of natural resources, forest, non-timber forest products, 
nature-based tourism, biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services (refer 
IRRF 4.1.1)
Baseline: 834,558
Target: 1,738,533 (disaggregated by gender)
Data source: Government reports
Indicator 2.3.3: Number of financial solutions executed to mobilize resources 
for management of biodiversity and ecosystems
Baseline: 2
Target: At least 4
Data source: MONRE
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Continue building the rule of law, socialist, developmental state of integrity and action; intensify the anti-corruption fight, practice thrift and avoid wastefulness; create breakthroughs 
in administrative reform
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP: Outcome 3 – By 2026, people in Viet Nam, especially those at risk of being left behind, will benefit from and contribute to a more 
just, safe and inclusive society based on improved governance, more responsive institutions, strengthened rule of law and the protection of and respect for human rights, gender equality and freedom 
from all forms of violence and discrimination in line with Viet Nam’s international commitments
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
Indicator 4.1: Proportion of female 
deputies in National Assembly
Baseline: 30.26%
Target: More than 30% 
Indicator 4.6: Proportion of 
population satisfied with their last 
experience with public services 
Baseline: 84.45% 
Target: 86% 
Indicator 4.7: Proportion of persons 
who had at least one contact with a 
public official and who paid a bribe 
to a public official, or were asked for 
a bribe by a public official, during 
previous 12 months 
Baseline: Bribe for land use right 
certificates: 27%
Target: <20%
National Assembly
Ministry of Home Affairs 
PAPI
Output 3.1: Rule of law institutions and systems strengthened, and 
implementation of laws monitored to expand access to justice and freedom 
from discrimination, with a focus on vulnerable groups
Indicator 3.1.1: Extent to which government officials and other stakeholders 
have the knowledge and skills on UN human rights reporting methodology (refer 
IRRF 2.2.1)
Baseline: 2
Target: 4
Data source: Self-assessment reports 
Rating scale: 
1 = Not adequate (25%-50%) 
2 = Partial (50%-75%) 
3 = Moderate (75%-90%) 
4 = Largely/mostly (90% and above)
Indicator 3.1.2: Extent of implementation of UN Guiding Principles on 
Business and Human Rights
Baseline: 1 
Target: 5
Data source: Office of the Government, Ministry of Justice 
• National Assembly 
agencies 
• Ministry of Justice
• Ministry of Defense
• Ministry of Labour, 
Invalids and Social 
Affairs (MOLISA)
• Ministry of Public 
Security 
• Committee on Ethnic 
Minority Affairs
• Government Inspectorate
• UNICEF
• United Nations 
Population Fund
• United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime
• United Nations
Volunteers
Regular:
$3,250,000
Other: $35,082,475
15 The first provincial capacity assessment is planned for 2021DP/DCP/VNM/3
Indicator 4.8: Corruption Perception 
Index
Baseline: Score 36/100
Target: Score between 50 and 59
Indicator 4.11: Number of new and 
revised laws/policies on protecting 
the rights of persons with disability 
supported by the United Nations
Baseline: 0
Target: 3
Transparency International 
National Council on 
Disability
Rating scale: 
1 = Identification of gaps in alignment with UN responsible business principles 
2 = Assessment of level of implementation 
3 = Action plans available to address implementation gaps
4 = National action plan enacted by the government
5 = Implementation mechanisms initiated 
Indicator 3.1.3: Number of measures and solutions for enhanced access to legal 
aid (refer IRRF 2.2.3)
Baseline: 4
Target: 6
Data source: Ministry of Justice 
Output 3.2: Improved mechanisms for promoting transparency, public
participation, integrity, adaptability and accountability, including 
participation of women and other vulnerable groups
Indicator 3.2.1: Proportion of citizens with access to information on land use 
rights certification procedures from e-government portal
Baseline: 1.5%
Target: 10% (disaggregated by gender)
Data source: PAPI
Indicator 3.2.2: Number of national and subnational institutions with capacities 
to accelerate innovation for promoting citizen participation (refer IRRF 2.3.2)
Baseline: 7
Target: 16
Data source: Government reports
Indicator 3.2.3: Number of evidence-based policy recommendations to improve 
transparency, public integrity and accountability systems accepted by 
government
Baseline: 2
Target: 8 
Data source: Government reports
Output 3.3: Gender-responsive, risk-informed and anticipatory capacities 
supported to improve human security, respond to future crises and sustain 
peace
Indicator 3.3.1: Extent to which national and subnational institutions have the 
capacities to reduce the impact of explosive ordnance contamination
Baseline: 2
Target: 4
Data source: National mine action authorities 
Rating scale: 
1 = Not adequate (25%-50%) 
• European Union
• Norwegian Embassy
• Embassy of United 
Kingdom
• Korean International 
Cooperation Agency
• Australian Embassy
• Fatherland Front 
• Women’s Union
• National Economics 
University2 = Partial (50%-75%) 
3 = Moderate (75%-90%) 
4 = Largely/mostly (90% and above)
Indicator 3.3.2: Extent to which national systems are strengthened to prevent 
and combat trafficking in persons and support survivors
Baseline: 1
Target: 4 
Data source: Ministry of Public Security
Rating scale: 
1 = Identification of challenges in implementation of laws
2 = Proposal for law revision submitted to National Assembly for approval
3 = Revised law approved by National Assembly
4 = Newly approved law deployed by government
Indicator 3.3.3: Mechanism/tool to project migration flows available for policy 
development 
Baseline: No 
Target: Yes 
Data source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Indicator 3.3.4: Number of national and subnational institutions with enhanced 
anticipatory and adaptive capacities to prevent, mitigate and respond to crises
Baseline: 1
Target: 4
Data source: Relevant national authorities
Output 3.4: Capacities strengthened to undertake legal, policy and 
institutional reforms to address structural barriers to gender equality and 
inclusion of persons with disability
Indicator 3.4.1: Extent to which institutional mechanisms for active and 
meaningful participation of persons with disability in the lawmaking process are 
functional 
Baseline: 2
Target: 3
Data source: MOLISA, organizations of persons with disabilities
Rating scale: 
1 = Not at all
2 = Persons with disability contribute to development of institutional 
mechanisms
3 = Design of institutional mechanisms approved
4 = Mechanisms fully functional
Indicator 3.4.2: Number of evidence-based policy options provided to increase 
diversity and inclusion in public office, at national and subnational levels 
Baseline: 1 
Target: 4DP/DCP/VNM/3
Data source: UNDP 
Indicator 3.4.3: Number of mentoring platforms available to improve leadership 
capacities of women in public and private institutions (refer IRRF 6.2.1)
Baseline: 2 
Target: 8 
Data source: Women’s Union, industry federation 