File Name: VNM-NEDS-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Viet Nam
Country Code: VNM
Category: NEDS
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

COMMUNIST PARTY OF 
VIETNAM
*
Ref. 55-NQ/TW
VIETNAM
______________
Hanoi, 11 February 2020
RESOLUTION
OF THE POLITBURO
On Orientations of the Viet Nam’s National Energy Development 
Strategy to 2030 and outlook to 2045
-----
I- STATUS AND CAUSES
1. After 15 years of accomplishing the Conclusion ref. 26-KL/TW dated
24/10/2003 of the IXth Politburo on Viet Nam’s Power Development Plan and 
Strategy, and 10 years of implementing the Resolution No. 18-NQ/TW dated
25/10/2007 of the Xth Politburo on orientations of the Viet Nam’s National 
Energy Development Strategy to 2020 and outlook to 2050, the energy sector 
in general and the power sector, in particular, has seen a rapid and relatively 
synchronous development in all sub-sectors and fields, followed the 
orientations and achieved the set-out targets.
Energy supply, particularly power supply, basically met the requirements for
socio-economic development with improving quality. The oil and gas 
extraction industry, petrochemical and refinery industry have developed fast 
which resulted in the establishment of several large-scaled petrochemical 
refineries. A number of large-capacity coal mines were invested, and the 
extracted volume of commercial coal increased. Hydropower saw fast 
development while wind and solar power have recently been developing at 
high rate. Strong investments in the construction of power supply 
infrastructure facilitated and provided crucial condition for power supply 
security. Most of the country has been connected to the national grid 
including remote, border areas and island. Energy consumption has increased 
significantly, associating with the change in the composition energy 
consumption towards industrialization. the larger focus was placed on 
energy efficiency. the energy sector is continuously transforming to operate 
under market mechanisms, resulting in the greater mobilization of resourcesgy 
a dynamic economic sector, contributing to promoting socio-economic 
development, assuring national defense and security in many localities and for 
the country.
2. However, our country’s energy sector still found a lot of limits. The goal of 
assuring national energy security still encounter many challenges. In 
particular: domestic supply does not meet the energy demand which leads to 
increasing energy import; many power projects are behind the schedule; some 
energy security indicators are fluctuating in a negative manner. The 
Management and extraction of energy resources remains limited. Efficiency 
in energy exploitation and use is still low. The energy infrastructure is still 
incomplete and lacks uniformity. Technological qualification in some areas of 
the energy sector is slowly improved while localization and market support of
projects in the energy sector for domestic mechanical products are limited. 
Human resource quality and labor productivity in some fields remain low. 
The competitive energy market has not been developed comprehensively and 
adequately, featured by the lack of linkages among sub-sectors and between 
power generation and transmission. Energy price policies are inadequate and
inappropriate for market mechanisms and are not distinguished from social 
security policies. Some energy projects invested by state-owned enterprises 
still suffer loss while some other oversea energy projects are at risk of capital 
loss. Adequate attention has not fully paid to the environmental protection in 
the energy sector which leads to social concerns.
3. Such drawbacks are resulted from many reasons but mainly from subjective 
ones. The Awareness of the role, position, and importance of the energy 
sector, as well as the goal of ensuring national energy security, is not 
complete and inadequately paid attention to. Some energy development 
issues are delayed in reporting/ updating both policies and actual status and
tackling barriers to energy sources development orientations and 
concretization of socialist-oriented market mechanisms in the energy sector.
Legal regulations of the energy sector in general and each sub-sector, in 
particular, are still inadequate, inconsistent and incompatible with 
international laws and rules. Several mechanisms and policies do not fit with
market mechanisms and fail to promote the development of a competitive 
energy market. Policies on investment in, development and management of 
energy resources are insufficient and incomplete. Scientific and technological 
policies are slow in their development. Some energy strategies and plans are
dld ihilid id ih l iid plans of the locality and other sectors. State management apparatus of the 
energy sector in general and of the power sector is unstable. The assignment
of tasks and coordination among ministries, departments and localities in 
some cases are unclear and inconsistent. The research and forecast activities 
are poor while directing and organizing the implementation of policies and 
laws on energy are not drastic. 
II- GUIDING ORIENTATIONS, OBJECTIVES AND OUTLOOK
1. Guiding orientations
- To ensure the national energy security as the foundation and important 
premise for socio-economic development. To prioritize rapid and sustainable 
energy development, one step ahead, and in association with ecological 
environment protection, ensuring national defense and security, social 
progress and justice which is particularly important and is a central task 
throughout the industrialization and modernization of the country.
- To develop the national energy system in line with the socialist-oriented 
market economy and international integration trend; quickly develop a 
synchronous, competitive and transparent energy market, diversify forms of 
ownership and business modes; and apply market price for all kinds of 
energy. To promote and facilitate economic sectors, particularly the private 
sector, to participate in energy development; Resolutely eliminate all 
subsidies, monopoly, unfair competition and the lack of transparency in the 
energy sector.
- To synchronously and rationally develop and diversify various types of
energy; prioritize full and efficient exploitation and use of renewable energies, 
new and clean energies; rationally exploit and use domestic fossil energy 
sources, attaching significance to stabilization, regulation and required reserve 
of the national energy system; prioritize to gas-fired power development and 
suitable roadmap to reduce the share of coal-fired power; and actively import 
fuels from abroad for power plants. To optimally allocate the national energy 
system in all fields due to competitive advantages of each region and locality.
- To concentrate on research and apply the achievements of the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution in the development of all energy sub-sectors and fields; accelerate 
digital transformation in the energy sector; gradually master modern gy g gjy 
of energy equipment.
- To consider energy efficiency and environmental protection an important 
national policy and the responsibility of the whole society. To enhance 
energy audit, develop comprehensive mechanisms and policies, practical and 
strong sanctions to encourage investment and use of energy-efficient and 
environmentally friendly equipment, contributing to labor productivity 
improvement and growth model reform.
2. Objectives
a) Overall objectives
To ensure the national energy security, provide sufficient, stable and highquality energy at an affordable price for rapid and sustainable socio-economic 
development, ensure national defence and security, improve people’s lives
and contribute to the protection of the ecological environment. To develop the 
energy sector harmoniously among sub-sectors with complete and smart 
infrastructure, reaching the advanced level of ASEAN. To develop 
competitive, transparent and effective energy market in line with socialistoriented market economy. To effectively exploit and use domestic energy 
resources in combination with rational import and export of energy; 
thoroughly apply best practices on energy saving and efficiency. To take 
active in producing major equipment in energy sector; upgrade and construct 
advanced and modern power transmission and distribution grids.
b) Specific objectives
- To provide sufficient energy to meet domestic energy demand and satisfy
targets of the 10-year Socio-economic Development Strategy for 2021-2030, 
namely: the total primary energy supply to reach 175 – 195 million tons of oil 
equivalent (TOE) by 2030 and 320 – 350 million TOE by 2045; the total 
installed capacity of power sources to amount 125 - 130 GW and the power 
output to reach 550 - 600 billion kWh by 2030.
- The share of renewable energy sources in the total primary energy supply 
reaches 15 - 20% in 2030 and 25 - 30% in 2045.
- Total final energy consumption reaches 105-115 million TOE by 2030 and 
160-190 million TOE by 2045. The primary energy intensity is expected to gy g
GPD by 2045.
- To develop an efficient smart grid system with regional interconnectivity; 
ensure safe and secure power supply and meet N-1 criteria for important load 
centers and N-2 criteria for extremely important load centers; the power 
reliability to be among the top 4 ASEAN countries and the electricity access 
indicator among the top 3 ASEAN countries by 2030. 
- Oil refinery plants to meet at the minimum 70% of the domestic demand; 
ensure strategic petroleum reserve equal to at the minimum 90 days of net oil 
import. Ensure the capacity to import 8 billion m3 of LNG by 2030 and 15 
billion m3 by 2045.
- The energy-saving over the total final energy consumption against businessas-usual (BAU) scenario to reach 7% by 2030 and up to 20% by 2045.
- To reduce greenhouse gases emission from energy activities against the BAU 
scenario by 15% by 2030 and 20% by 2045.
3. Outlook to 2045
Ensure the national energy security; develop synchronously factors of a 
competitive and transparent energy market in line with a socialist-oriented 
market economy; Ensure sustainable development of energy sub-sectors, 
efficient use of resources, environmental protection and climate change 
adaptation; Develop a synchronous and modern energy infrastructure system 
with improved international and regional interconnectivity; ensure the quality of
the human resource, technological and scientific qualification and management 
capability in the energy sector to meet the level of a modern and developed 
industrial country.
III- MISSIONS AND KEY SOLUTIONS 
1. Development of primary energy sources towards enhancing autonomy, 
diversification, efficiency, reliability and sustainability
- Oil and gas: Extend seeking and exploration activities to provide additional 
reserves and extraction volume in potential, deep and offshore areas in 
association with the mission of protecting the national maritime sovereignty; 
improve recovery coefficient and salvage coefficients for small fields and 
marginal remnants. Review and employ a proactive and efficient strategy on gygy 
infrastructure for the importation and consumption of liquefied natural gases 
(LNG). Continue to attract investment in oil refinery and petrochemicals in 
the direction of deep processing, improving the quality of petroleum products, 
proactively meeting domestic demand and towards export. For oil and shale 
gas, gas hydrates (flammable ice): proactively conduct more in-depth research 
and assessment on geology and deploy advanced science and technology to 
expand the exploration area; conduct a holistic assessment, and boost trial 
exploitation when the conditions allow. 
- Coal: Develop a novel development strategy for the coal sector in agreement 
with the mission of efficient investment in overseas activities and coal 
imports in the long run. Ensure coal reservation to meet the requirements of 
production activities, particularly electricity generation. Extend seeking, 
exploration activities and improve the quality of the assessment on the levels 
of reserves and resources. Boost domestic coal extraction based on ensuring
safety, efficiency and saving; urgently undertake technological research to 
enable the exploitation of the coal basin in Red River delta; improve the clean 
coal recovery coefficient in mining operation. Quickly implement the 
development of a system of large-scale ports, and coal storage facilities and 
transshipment stations; increase mechanization and modernization of coal 
screening, sorting and mining equipment’s and machines. Conduct needs 
review and assessment, develop plans, and optimize the solutions for a stable 
coal supply for electricity generation suitable with market mechanism.
- Renewable energy: Formulate breakthrough mechanisms and policies to
encourage and promote remarkable development of renewable energy sources
towards maximal replacement of fossil energy sources. Prioritize the use of 
wind and solar power for electricity generation; promote investments in the 
development of power plants utilizing urban waste, solid waste and biomass 
in parallel with environmental protection and circular economy development. 
Construct and develop several renewable energies centers in regions and 
localities with favorable conditions. Promptly conduct research and holistic 
assessment on the potential of and develop directions for geothermal, wave, 
tidal power and ocean current power, implement models and pilot power 
exploitation with the aim of producing an efficiency evaluation. Conduct 
technology research and develop plans for piloting electricity generation using 
hydrogen and encouraging the use of hydrogen consistent with the global 
tdgy y g
development under allowable conditions for scientific and technical advances,
human resources, financial capabilities and other necessary factors. 
2. Rapid and sustainable development of the power sector to meet the 
requirements of national industrialization and modernization
- Formulate and implement the Vietnam power sector development strategy for
the new period. Enable the rapid and sustainable development of power 
sources, with well-designed structure and allocation, to ensure safety, 
reliability, stability towards diversification, an increased active power factor, 
and proper power reserve; and to meet the requirements for the protection of 
the ecological environment. 
Hydropower: maximize the mobilization of the existing hydropower 
resources. Selectively develop additional small and medium-sized 
hydropower plants and pumped storage hydropower plants. Deploy a 
strategy for international cooperation in hydropower development 
associated with the long-term power imports. 
Wind and solar power: Prioritize wind and solar power development while 
ensuring the safety of the national power system and reasonable price.
Encourage rooftop and floating solar PV. Develop supporting policies and a 
breakthrough mechanism enabling offshore wind power development in 
association with the implementation of Vietnam’s Marine Strategy. 
Thermal power: Promote thermal power projects with synchronized supply 
chain, fuel storage, and power plant construction on the basis of feed-in tariffs 
determined through auction. Develop gas-fired power plants in the direction 
of prioritizing the use of domestic gas sources. Focus on the rapid
development of gas-fired power plant using LNG so that it gradually become 
an important power supply source supporting the regulation of national power 
system. 
Development of coal-fired thermal power development at a reasonable level 
prioritizing large-capacity unit with high efficiency, deploying advanced 
modern technologies such as ultra-supercritical (USC) onwards. Ensure full 
compliance with laws and regulations on ecological safety in accordance with 
international standards. Conduct a holistic review and formulate a plan for 
prompt technological upgrade of the existing coal-fired power plants in order y 
power plants which do not upgrade their technology according to regulations.
Biomass, waste and solid waste to energy: Maximally exploit biomass cogeneration; strengthen the development of electricity generation from urban
and solid waste and biomass sources.
- Invest in the modernization of the power sector in the production,
transmission, distribution phases to meet the development requirements of the 
power market with strong capability to integrate a large amount of renewable 
energy; improve the capability to ensure power system safety and the quality 
of power services. Proactively run demand-side management programs and 
demand response management programs; enable more closely management of 
power consumption intensity; minimize power losses; finalize supporting 
policies and mechanisms for encouraging and catalyzing power reserves. 
Modernize the national power regulatory system, gradually apply smart 
automated monitoring technologies; research and apply ultra-high-voltage 
transmission and direct current transmission in the national power sector.
- Research and finalize financial regimes and mobilize special capital 
investments into the development of the power sector. Review and revise the 
existing regulations on regulating and coordinating the power market. Operate 
a mechanism that allows the development of localized and self-sufficient
power plants within industrial parks and clusters, export processing zones.
- Accelerate the competitive power market development roadmap, a mechanism
for promoting direct power purchase agreements between producers and 
consumers, suitable bidding and auctioning mechanisms for energy 
generation, particularly within new and renewable energy investment projects;
enable transparent Feed-in Tariffs. Provide a mechanism for promoting and 
attracting non-State investment in the national power transmission system.
Operate an independent national power transmission system under the state 
management. 
3. Restructuring of energy consumption industries and sectors in parallel 
with implementing policies on clean, economical and efficient use of energy
- Restructure energy consumption sectors, particularly the foreign investment, 
to reduce energy intensity. Adopt policies to encourage the development of 
industries with low-economic consumption and high socio-economic 
efficiencyggy 
in a distributed manner and limit the excessive concentration in a number of 
localities, closely associating with the redistribution of space for industrial 
and urban development at the national, regional and local levels. 
- Review and finalize the National Energy Efficiency Program in the 2020 –
2030 period. Implement mandatory standards and regulations in parallel with 
sanctions on energy efficiency for sectors and products with high energy 
consumption. Promulgate policies encouraging residential households to use 
clean and renewable energy, particularly in industry and transportation; 
catalyze the development of electric vehicles in association with global trends. 
4. Development of sustainable energy infrastructure, regional 
interconnection; improvement of the internal capacity in the manufacturing 
industry and services to support the national power sector
- Develop policies on prioritizing investments in sustainable energy 
infrastructure development; focus on developing infrastructure supporting 
energy imports and exports, and regional interconnection. Identify the list of 
energy facilities that can be shared and formulate a suitable mechanism for 
sharing energy facilities in association with market mechanisms. Break down
the monopoly and unsuitable barriers against the usage of energy facilities and 
service infrastructure; develop mechanisms and policies on investment in the 
development of power transmission system and separate from the state 
monopoly in power transmission. Enable maximal mobilization of social 
resources for investment, exploitation, and utilization of energy infrastructure 
and services, including the national power transmission system, on the basis 
of guaranteed national defense and security. 
- Accelerate digital transformation in the energy sector; develop and implement 
the National Program on Smart Energy Infrastructure Development; finalize 
supporting mechanisms, develop a database, produce the national energy 
statistics to support effective management and administration of the energy 
sector.
- Develop relevant mechanisms and policies to promote and facilitate the 
development of the manufacturing industry and services supporting the 
energy sector towards strengthening internal capacity and towards export; 
prioritize the development of machinery manufacturing industry, electrical 
facilities production, petroleum industry, and petroleum services. Finalize gy gygy 
service company (ESCO) model. Urgently formulate and implement relevant 
mechanisms and policies to encourage localization rate in the energy sector; 
ensure the fulfilment of specific requirements and targets associated with 
localization rate in energy projects in general, and power plants in particular.
Finalize State procurement mechanisms with the aim of encouraging domestic 
enterprises to deliver complex and high-tech projects in the energy sector in 
compliance with international quality standards. 
5. Restructuring, renovation and improvement of the performance of the 
state-owned enterprises in the energy sector; promotion of the private
sector’s involvement in socialization for energy development 
- Fully restructure state-owned enterprises in the energy sector with the 
orientation of focusing on their core sector with strong advantages; separate
business function and state management function; apply advanced 
administration models and practice, improve the global credit ratings, fully 
implement transparency in activities; focus on enhancing the efficiency of 
exploitation and utilization of the national energy infrastructure. Finalize 
existing regulations on evaluating resources and properties in association with 
international practice and practical context; process throughout and 
restructure inefficient projects and state-owned enterprises, making losses in 
the energy sector. Research and implement a pilot mechanism for time-limited 
sales or long-term leases applicable for power plants, fuel storage warehouses, 
oil refineries, etc. possessed by state-owned enterprises.
- Review, supplement and revise special mechanisms and policies for a number 
of key power projects, particularly for urgent power source investment 
projects; ensure sufficient capital for state-owned energy enterprises to deliver
their strategic goals in association with the mission of guaranteeing national 
defense and security.
- Create a favorable and transparent environment; publicize the plan and list of 
available investment projects to remove all barrier to attract and encourage 
private sector’s investment and development of domestic and overseas energy 
projects, concentrating on power generation projects and wholesale and retail
of electricity wholesalers on the basis of the market mechanism. Continue to 
promote and attract foreign investment in large scale and with high quality 
and efficiency in the power sector. Accelerate equitization of state-owned g
administrative procedures to ensure the progress of power projects.
6. Reforming mechanisms and policies, development of a synchronous, 
interlinked, modern and efficient energy market, with the socialist 
orientation
- Develop a synchronous market with the interlinkages among sub-sectors 
(power, coal, oil and gas and renewable energy) and connect to the regional 
and global markets. Eradicate barriers to ensure transparent energy prices set
by the market with no cross-subsidies among groups of clients and regions. The 
State shall regulate through appropriate market instruments (taxes, fees, funds 
and others) and social security policies. Finalize market mechanisms, policies 
and instruments to boost the energy efficiency. 
- Review, adjust and finalize policies on land, site clearance and compensation, 
surface water use and fights against speculation, profiteering and interest
groups in the energy sector. Renovate financial policies toward encouraging 
and strongly attracting non-state investments capital; facilitating energy 
investment projects in line with the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) model.
Apply flexible and effective credit policies to create favorable conditions for 
energy enterprises, especially for enterprises with green energy projects, to 
access sources of capital. Finalize tax policies to stimulate the production and 
use of green and renewable energy. Develop legal foundations so as to form
and effectively operate funds for sustainable energy development and energy 
efficiency toward socialization, ensuring financial independence, avoiding the 
overlap with revenues and expenditures of the state budget and limiting the 
activities which increase the operation, production and business costs of 
enterprises and manufacturers. Finalizing mechanisms and implementing 
policies on standard proportions of renewable energy in the energy investment
and supply structure.
- Revise and finalize specialized laws on oil and gas, electricity and energy 
efficiency and other energy-related laws to realize market mechanisms in a 
more efficient manner. Research and legalize the operation of FIT and some 
incentives for projects in the energy sector which are prioritized for 
investments. Research, formulate and promulgate the law on renewable 
energy.y g gy g
especially in the power sub-sector, ensuring stability, synchronicity, 
flexibility and in-line with socio-economic strategies and plans of provinces 
and other sectors. Review, adjust and issue energy development plan as soon 
as possible in compliance with the Law on Planning.
7. Developing science and technology and training high-quality human 
resources for the energy sector
- Create the mechanisms for connecting scientific and technological research
resources, innovate with enterprises and educational facilities in the energy 
sector through programs in science and technology; integrate research and 
develop activities into energy development strategies, planning and plans.
Formulate the mechanism to incentivize energy enterprises to enhance 
investments in research and development and establish innovation centers in 
the energy sector. Continuing to realize the national target science and 
technology program on researching the application and development of energy 
technologies in the period of 2021 - 2030 with focuses on producing energy
equipment; applying new, renewable energy, smart energy and saving energy.
- Review, amend and supplement national standards and norms in the energy 
sector in alignment with international regulations and standards, taking into 
consideration national standards and norms related to the recycling and reuse 
of waste from energy generation. Gradually applying measures to encourage 
and obligate the innovation of technologies and equipment in the energy 
sector as well as in energy-intensive industries. 
- Develop the master policy on human resource development and training 
programs for key steps in the energy sector. Enhancing the training for 
technical employees and professional staff to meet the demand of domestic 
use and export. Effectively utilizing the human resource trained on nuclear 
energy, as while providing them with advanced training.
8. Strengthening international cooperation; actively and proactively 
developing strategic partnerships to realize the targets of importing 
energy in the long term and investing in overseas energy resources
- Implement external energy policies in a flexible, effective, equal and winwin manner. Extend and deepen energy cooperation with crucial strategic 
partners. Enhance international relations on energy in all sub-sectors and 
areas in line with the international integration trend; taking advantages of g
for energy development.
- Urgently develop the long-term energy import strategy, while encouraging
investment in and exploitation of energy resources in foreign countries to 
contribute to ensuring the national energy security; create mechanisms to 
facilitate Vietnamese enterprises to invest in energy projects abroad
prioritizing power projects in neighboring countries, thereby actively 
importing electricity to Viet Nam. Expand the partnerships with companies 
investing in energy and advanced energy technologies development. 
- Proactively participate in the energy cooperation in the Greater Mekong SubRegion (GMS) and Southeast Asian Region (ASEAN); connect power grids 
and finalize the power purchase mechanism with China, Laos and Cambodia. 
Continue to research the connection of gas systems in the region and realize 
the connection when possible.
9. Implementing environmental protection policies of the energy sector in 
combination with the target of reducing greenhouse gases and promoting 
the circular economy and sustainable development
- Research and develop appropriate carbon tax policies for the use of fossil 
fuels. Formulate mechanisms and policies on recovering and using CO2.
Assess the efficiency of using and recycling ash and slag arising on the basis 
of balancing between the demand and the consumption capacity for 
construction materials, especially in the South. 
- Finalize the policy framework, develop and supplement the system of national 
standards and norms on emission and waste in the energy sector toward 
aligning with standards of developed countries. Supplement regulations on 
investment screening for projects based on environmental risks. Developing 
financial statutes on environment, which ensure the sufficient inclusion of
environmental and social costs in product price and investment costs.
Strengthen the prevention and regulation of subjects that are highly likely to 
pollute the environment and strictly punish violations of environmental safety 
in accordance with the provision of the law. Disseminate information about 
environmental protection in the energy sector in a timely and adequate manner. 
- Develop and implement the Project on integrating the circular economic 
model into the energy enterprise development strategy. Develop waste 
management and processing system in energy production with advanced gyg 
handling capacity in energy enterprises. Create mechanisms and policies to 
encourage the development of the environment industry linking closely to the 
energy sector. 
- Review, adjust and include the contents relevant to the energy sector in the 
National Strategy on Climate Change, National Strategy on Green Growth, 
Vietnam Sustainable Development Strategy, Vietnam Maritime Strategy, and 
other related strategies.
10. Enhancing the Party’s leadership; improving the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the State’s management and promoting the right of people as 
masters and the roles of Vietnam Fatherland Front as well as other sociopolitical in energy development
- Raise the awareness of Party’s committee leaders, the political system and
people of the role, position and importance of the energy sector. Party’s 
committee leaders and authorities from the central to local levels need to 
consider the national energy development as an important and cross-cutting
task; take serious lead, provide guidance and organize the implementation of 
this task. Develop mechanisms and legal frameworks to ensure the 
compliance with the National Energy Development Plan. Strictly address
stagnant investment projects, affecting national energy security.
- Review and finalize the state management model in the energy sector. Clearly 
define responsibilities, rights and coordination mechanisms between the
central and local levels and among state management agencies in energy 
development. Promote the dissemination and communication of legal 
normative documents on energy. Fulfill the role of policy orientation and 
development in combination with the enhanced inspection, supervision,
support for policy implementation. 
- Promote ownership rights of the people; increase the engagement of the 
Vietnam Fatherland Front, socio-political organizations, socio-professional 
organizations and those impacted by the policies in the development and 
monitoring the implementation of national energy development strategies and 
plans.
IV- IMPLEMENTATION
1. The provincial and municipal Party committees as well as the Partyy 
Resolution to their staff and Party’s members as well as develop programs 
and plans to implement the Resolution.
2. The Party’s Union of the National Assembly leads the research, amendment, 
supplementation, and finalization of laws to facilitate the national energy 
development in line with the Resolution; increasingly supervising the
formulation and implementation of national energy development strategies, 
plans and policies. 
3. The Government’s party-appointed leadership body leads the development 
and implementation of the national energy development strategy and 
development strategies of energy sub-sectors, National Energy Master Plan
and National Power Development Plan in line with the Resolution; prioritizes 
adequate resources for the implementation of tasks stated in the Resolution;
urgently implements international commitments in researching the application 
of nuclear energy for the peace; summarizes and reviews the Electricity Law 
and other related laws to be summited to the National Assembly soon for 
revising inadequacies, especially in the planning and power transmission. 
4. The Vietnam Fatherland Front and socio-political organizations develop 
programs and plan to supervise the implementation of the Resolution.
5. Central Propaganda and Training Commission leads and collaborates with the 
Central Economic Commission and related agencies to imperatively guide the
implementation of the Resolution.
6. The Central Economic Commission leads and collaborates with related 
agencies to regularly monitor, guide, examine, supervise and expedite the 
implementation of the Resolution; periodically conducts the preliminary
summary and recap of the implementation of the Resolution and report to the 
Politburo and the Party’s Secretariat.
Recipients: 
- Provincial People’s Committees, 
- Party’s commissions, Party-appointed 
leadership body, Party’s unions, Party’s 
committees at the central level, 
- Party’s committees of central administration
agencies,
- Members of central leadership body
P.P. THE POLITBURO
THE SECRETARY GENERALCommittee.