File Name: WSM-CPD-2023-EN
Year: 2023
Country Name: Samoa
Country Code: WSM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 January – 3 February 2023
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
2 December 2022
Original: English
2227500X (E) 151222 
First regular session 2023
30 January – 3 February 2023, New York
Item 7 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Multi-country programme document for the Cook Islands,
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, 
Palau, Republic of the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Solomon 
Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu (2023-2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 9
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 11
Annex
Results and resources framework ......................................................................................... 12I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. Spread across nearly three thousand islands, the Pacific Island Countries and Territories1
are rich in cultural diversity, have considerable marine and natural resources, and have made 
rapid social and economic progress. Of the 10 countries ranked in the Human Development
Index,
2 Fiji, Palau, Tonga, and Samoa are in the high human development category, while 
the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Tuvalu,
Vanuatu and the Solomon Islands are in the medium category. Fiji, the Marshall Islands, 
Tonga, and Tuvalu are upper-middle-income countries, while the Federated States of 
Micronesia, Kiribati, Samoa, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu are lower-middle-income 
countries.
3 Kiribati, the Solomon Islands, and Tuvalu are categorized as least developed 
countries.
2. Economies remain undiversified and dependent on imported goods for consumption and
investment, leading to cost disadvantages for provision of public services by governments. A 
quarter of Pacific islanders live below the ‘basic needs’ poverty line,
4
and post-COVID, 
economic growth rates have declined by 6.6 per cent over 2020 and 2021.5 World Bank 
estimates (based on limited data), indicate that the effects of growth on inequality have been
mixed.
6 Unemployment among youth in the region is estimated at 23 per cent.7 The Federated 
States of Micronesia, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Samoa, Tonga and Tuvalu are at high 
risk of debt distress.
8 The United Nations E-Governance Survey, 2021, highlighted that most 
Pacific Island countries and territories fall well below the average global e-governance score 
of 0.59. Except for Fiji, Palau and Tonga, most also lag behind the regional average egovernance score.9 Corruption remains high – one in three people using a public service 
reported paying a bribe; a quarter reported being offered a bribe for their votes.10 The 
compounding impacts of the global geopolitical conflicts and disruptions leading to higher 
prices for energy and essential commodities may further weaken the economies of the Pacific
and lead to food insecurity. 
3. In 2021, women’s representation in the Pacific Island Countries and Territories remained
low. Women held 6 per cent of seats, and were not represented in parliaments in three 
countries.11 Between 36 and 79 per cent of women in the region had experienced physical or 
sexual violence in their lifetime.
12 While HIV prevalence remained low, at 0.1 per cent, only 
59 per cent of people living with HIV were receiving treatment.
13 Nearly 15 per cent of the 
population lived with disabilities.
14 The World Bank estimates that 40 per cent to 60 per cent 
of the government health budget was spent on non-communicable diseases, which accounted
for nearly 75 per cent of all deaths in the Pacific Island countries and territories. The Pacific
1 UNDP has two multi-country offices in the Pacific subregion. The Fiji multi-country office implements programmes in the 
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands, Nauru, Palau, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and 
Vanuatu. The Samoa multi-country office implements programmes in the Cook Islands, Niue, Samoa, and Tokelau.
2 Human Development Report, 2021-2022
3 World Bank, 2021
4 United Nations, ‘A Quarter of Pacific Islanders Live Below Basic Needs Poverty Lines’, 2019. (Limited poverty data available)
5 Asian Development Bank Outlook, 2022
6 https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/rcs-pacific-2016-2020-ld-01.pdf
7 The Future of Work for Women in the Pacific Islands, Asia Foundation 2021
8 Financing a Sustainable Recovery from COVID-19 and Beyond, ESCAP, 2022
9 United Nations E-Governance Survey, 2021
10 Global Corruption Barometer – Pacific, 2021
11 https://www.unwomen.org/en/what-we-do/leadership-and-political-participation/facts-and-figures
12 United Nations Population Fund, 2020
13 W
ld Hlth Oiti2020has the potential to harness the demographic dividend, with half the population under the age 
of 23.
15
4. The Pacific is among the regions most at risk from rising sea levels and the triple 
planetary crisis of climate change, pollution, and biodiversity loss.16 The existential threat 
posed by climate change to livelihoods, security and the well-being of people and ecosystems 
in the region was established in the Boe Declaration, 2018, and led to the Pacific leaders’
declaring a climate emergency in 2022. A rise in global temperatures of 2 degrees Celsius 
above preindustrial levels, as is becoming increasingly likely, could severely degrade 
90 per cent of the coral reefs in the Pacific Islands region, leading to devastating effects on 
marine species. The region suffered, on average, one major disaster every year for the past 
six years, and up to 832,000 people were displaced due to natural hazards between 2010 and 
2020.17 On average, a disaster causes 14 per cent damage to the gross domestic product (GDP)
and affects 11 per cent of population. The increasing impact of climate change is pushing 
natural and human systems beyond their ability to adapt. The climate financing needs of the 
region are estimated at 6.5 to 9 per cent of GDP, or almost $1 billion annually.18 The region 
is highly fossil-fuel dependent for its energy production and consumption, despite progress 
in renewable energy technology. Due to distance and the dispersion of populations, maritime 
transport consumes three quarters of the petroleum imports.19
5. The Pacific United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework was 
designed in harmony with the Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, 2050, developed by 
the leaders of all 14 countries and territories, based on their individual national plans. 
Although unique in their own context, each has cross-cutting priorities, such as climate and 
disaster resilience, improved natural resource management, good governance, leaving no-one 
behind, and cultural preservation and inclusion. Those priorities are encapsulated in the 
Strategy for the Blue Pacific, which recognizes that for the Pacific peoples, language, culture 
and identity are the cornerstones of well-being. The four outcomes of the Pacific Cooperation 
Framework contribute directly to all the thematic areas identified by the Strategy. Further, 
the “strategic pathways” outlined in the Pacific leaders’ strategy conform to the principles 
enumerated in the Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, particularly regarding 
inclusion, equity, resilience, and well-being.
6. This 5-year multi-country programme is derived from the Pacific Cooperation 
Framework, 2023-2027, and the national plans of the 14 Pacific Island Countries and 
Territories aligned with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Small Island 
Developing States Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway. Guided by the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2022-2025, and scaling up on the progress made in the last programme cycle, the 
contribution of UNDP to the Cooperation Framework will operationalize the Secretary 
General’s recommendations to support small island developing States and contribute to the 
Blue Pacific Continent strategy.20
7. Considering the unique and complex challenges faced by the Pacific Island Countries
and Territories, the programme will adopt an agile, innovative, risk-informed approach, while 
considering future uncertainties due to the unprecedented scale of the socio-economic 
situation, and structural limitations. Towards this vision, UNDP will contribute to the
Cooperation Framework outcome results of ‘Prosperity, Planet, and Peace’ and provide 
leadership to the outcome areas of ‘Planet’ and ‘Peace’. 
15 Statistics for Development Division, 2021
16 Sustainable Development Solutions Network, 2021
17 International Organization for Migration, Pacific displacement data, 2021
18 International Monetary Fund, 2021. Unlocking Access to Climate Finance for Pacific Island Countries
19 Asian Development Bank, 2019
20 Ri
ifSIDS ffhtt//d/it//fil/kk326/fil/iti/bb/dbb2PSIDSOff8. As the technical lead on socio-economic recovery issues, UNDP will work with the 
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the 
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United Nations Capital Development Fund 
(UNCDF), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
(UN-Women) and United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to enhance investments 
in inclusive and sustainable economic recovery. UNDP will play an integrator role in
enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations effort for the blue economy transformation 
and providing technical assistance in operationalizing the Blue Continent strategy, within the 
framework of the recently established United Nations Council of Regional Organizations of 
the Pacific task force. UNDP is co-leading the Sustainable Development Goals group with 
ESCAP providing integrated policy advice and solutions to the regional bodies on 
acceleration in achieving, monitoring and reporting on the Goals, and developing and 
operationalizing the integrated national financing framework initiatives. As a chair of the 
early-recovery cluster group, UNDP will work with the United Nations Office for Disaster 
Risk Reduction to promote effective disaster risk management practices in all Pacific 
countries, coordinating the early recovery effort, leveraging its presence across the Pacific,
and promoting South-South cooperation as a system-wide strategy. With the United Nations 
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), UNDP leads initiatives to 
address gender-based violence, while also supporting the efforts of the Gender Coordination 
Group and the United Nations Partnership on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
9. The independent country programme evaluation, 2022, confirms the areas of 
comparative advantage that UNDP has brought to bear in its work in the Pacific, which have 
led to notable successes. The evaluation noted that UNDP is a trusted and sought-after 
collaborator in the Pacific, with partnerships at the highest levels of government, and is 
recognized for its agile and adaptive management capacities. Its role during the COVID-19
pandemic and after cyclone Harold led to the waiver of transfer fees by telecom companies, 
resulting in increased remittances. Many thousands were enrolled into formal financial 
services with access to micro-insurances, pensions, and mobile money wallets – all of which 
helped the most vulnerable to absorb COVID-19-induced economic shocks. In Vanuatu, the 
digitization of national identity card registrations fast-tracked inclusion of 72 per cent of the 
population, facilitating their access to a range of public services.
10. Second, the proven track record of UNDP in mobilizing funding from vertical funds 
boosted government demand for environmental programming. In terms of effectiveness, the 
breadth of the UNDP climate change portfolio successfully addressed ground-level activities 
and national-level policies and strategies, as well as international agreements including the 
development and implementation of national adaptation plans in several countries. In relation 
to integrated resource management, the evaluation noted UNDP achievements in 
demonstrating approaches such as ‘Ridge to Reefs’, which provided data for decision-making 
through the implementation of concrete activities that increased the appetite of countries for
integrated resource management work. 
11. The evaluation made special mention of UNDP comparative advantages in its ground 
presence in and long-term relationship with the Pacific Island Countries and Territories,
including through its recent ‘Rising Up for SIDS’ offer, its openness to joint programming, 
and its ability to capitalize on the technical skills of its partners. In the preceding cycle, there 
were more than 80 joint United Nations programmes; UNDP was a partner in almost half of 
them. 
12. To further strengthen effective governance, the evaluation recommended scaling up 
UNDP interventions to promote effective governance in strengthening transparency and 
accountability, rule of law, access to justice, and effective approaches to combating
corruption. The independent evaluation noted that UNDP is well positioned to assist – with
its knowledge, global experience, and networks – in promoting blue economy transformation. 13. To ensure sustainability, the programme proposes a comprehensive framework for 
gender-sensitive capacity-building at the institutional level, to be applied as appropriate 
across outcomes. Based on the UNDP comparative advantage, this can include (a) addressing 
gaps in laws, policies, systems, and strategies; (b) augmenting technical skills, explicit 
knowledge, and methodologies; (c) reducing gaps in organisational structure; (d) improving 
and regulating operational capacities; and (e) introducing or enhancing adaptive capacities.
14. Key UNDP strategies to support the Cooperation Framework of the Pacific will be to:
(a) strengthen partnerships across the United Nations system, drawing on entities’ 
complementary strengths to deliver stronger results;
(b) leverage partnerships with regional bodies, including with the agencies of the 
Council of Regional Organizations of the Pacific;
(c) nurture experimentation and foresight capabilities through the Accelerator Labs
Network;
(d) buttress capacities for improved evidence-based policy analysis, reframe policy 
choices as required, and enable shifts to address systemic gaps;
(e) explore innovative financing pathways;
(f) approach and address issues from a systems perspective to leverage linkages across 
interventions and outcome areas;
(g) harness the comprehensive on-ground presence of UNDP across the 14 Pacific 
Island Countries and Territories;
(h) address the intersecting forms of deprivation, disadvantage, and discrimination 
faced by women and girls; and
(i) harness solidarity, based on the 2022 Pacific roundtable, on scaling up South-South 
and triangular cooperation in the Pacific Islands to accelerate achievement of the 
Sustainable Development Goals in the post-COVID-19 environment.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
15. This programme document for the multi-country offices of Fiji and Samoa is based on 
wide-ranging country-level and regional consultations across constituencies. Artificial 
intelligence and foresight tools were used to generate insights and synthesize inputs specific 
to the Pacific Island Countries and Territories.
16. The vision of the Cooperation Framework is that all people in the Pacific, leaving no one
behind, are equal and free to exercise their fundamental rights, enjoy gender equality and 
peace, resilient to existential threats, and live in harmony with the blue continent. Towards 
this vision, UNDP will contribute and provide leadership to three Cooperation Framework 
outcome areas (‘Prosperity’, ‘Planet’, and ‘Peace’), and will guide joint planning, monitoring, 
and reporting. 
17. Pursuant to recommendations of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of the 
United Nations system, UNDP will build national ownership and durable partnerships to 
deliver coherent, integrated development solutions that maximize impact. While 
strengthening national statistical capacities, UNDP will deploy its expertise to advance 
innovative policy solutions, integrated data analytics and foresight, and system-wide offers 
on evidence-based programmatic approaches. UNDP remains committed to full 
implementation of the United Nations System-wide Action Plan on Gender Equality and the 
Empowerment of Women.
18. UNDP will make a special effort to target remote outer islands in the Pacific. Logistical, 
technological, and weather-related challenges are common there, worsened by distance from 
markets and high transportation costs. Women and youth will be a focus, particularly in 
programmes on justice deliverylivelihoods generationenvironmental conservationand disabilities, sexual minorities, and communities at increased risk of HIV infection.
Intersectionality of their vulnerabilities will help identify those at risk of being left farthest 
behind in each intervention.
Outcome 1. Planet
19. The theory of change underpinning this outcome is that if ecosystems and biodiversity 
are better managed, protected and restored, if climate change adaptation and disaster risk 
management policies and initiatives continue to be developed in consultation with 
communities and implemented with a gender-responsive and human rights based approach; 
and if climate change and disaster risks are increasingly addressed through a development 
and systems lens, then the region will be progressively more resilient to climate change and 
other shocks, and will reduce pollution and biodiversity loss. The six UNDP signature 
solutions will be applied to all initiatives.
20. UNDP will support the Pacific Island Countries and Territories in strengthening and 
implementing their nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement, with 
better analysis of the critical climate security challenges they face. This will include 
supporting multi-stakeholder decision-making processes, applying gender-responsive 
climate information for adaptation and mitigation, and helping partners manage the national 
greenhouse gas inventory process, climate change measurement, reporting, and verification. 
UNDP will scale up successful initiatives from its partnerships with the International 
Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund and regional 
organizations to work on intersections between climate security, migration, and border 
management. Based on climate change vulnerability and impact scenarios, UNDP will
expand support to Pacific Island countries and territories to incorporate climate risks into 
infrastructure design and establish climate-proof assets that address the increasing frequency 
and intensity of disasters and sea-level rise. Based on climate security risk assessments, 
UNDP will support low-lying atoll nations, and volcanic countries, with conflict-sensitive 
peacebuilding approaches aligned with the Boe Declaration and Action Plan.
21. UNDP will support countries and territories in the Pacific in addressing energy 
security challenge by collaborating with governments and partners to formulate policies 
and instruments that facilitate the application of low-carbon renewable energy and 
energy-efficiency technologies and measures. Initiatives will include sustainable 
transport; training of local experts in design, engineering, and installation; and financial
incentives to stimulate the adoption of renewable energy and energy-efficiency 
technologies. UNDP will pursue strategies to ensure that energy access and technology 
address the needs and preferences of women, particularly in vulnerable households.
South-South cooperation with Brazil, Costa Rica, India, Indonesia, Morocco, Thailand, 
and Uruguay will be sought to facilitate finance and ensure the affordability of renewable 
energy. 
22. UNDP will scale up its work with governments to establish programmatic approaches to 
disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation through institution strengthening and 
risk-informed planning and financing at all levels of government, non-governmental 
organizations, and the private sector. As noted in the independent evaluation, the success of 
UNDP in disaster response and preparedness was due largely to its ability to leverage SouthSouth cooperation, mainstream disaster risk reduction through national and subnational 
strategies, leverage resources from multiple projects towards common goals, and use data for 
disaster risk reduction. Integrating these lessons, efforts will be made to use climate change 
and disaster risk finance to increase the resilience of public investments and modify 
development finance to reduce disaster and climate risks, working with the United Nations 
Office for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Government of Japan, and vertical funds. UNDP will 
help the authorities to operationalize these plans and priorities using gender-sensitive, riskinformed approaches, setting regulatory frameworks and systems for accountability and 
reporting. Interventions will be designed to strengthen capacities for end-to-end early 23. UNDP will work with partners to harness the opportunities provided by biodiversity and 
natural ecosystems and put the anticipated Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework into 
practice through the protection and conservation of land, water and ocean resources, while 
adapting to climate change, enhancing local capacity, and generating financing and payments 
for nature and ecosystem services. This will include promoting nature-based 
solutions, including ocean-based climate action and disaster prevention and circular economy 
activities. In partnership with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and UNEP,
UNDP will support the promotion of natural resource management to deliver multiple 
development benefits in key economic sectors including tourism, agriculture, and fisheries.
24. UNDP will continue to apply successfully tested approaches such as ‘Ridge to Reefs’ in 
its effort to enhance integrated natural resource management. UNDP will work with FAO
and the World Food Programme to strengthen sustainable food systems. This will generate 
environmental benefits for climate change mitigation, biodiversity conservation, and land 
degradation, as well as contribute to food security, livelihoods and climate resilience, and 
better health and nutrition, responding particularly to the growing challenge of noncommunicable diseases in the Pacific. This work will be reinforced by initiatives with 
women, youth, and people with disabilities, ensuring effective resilience-building and 
participation of marginalized groups and communities, so that no place or person is left 
behind.
Outcome 2. Prosperity
25. The theory of change underpinning this outcome is that if the opportunities offered by 
the green and blue economy are leveraged; if equitable livelihoods and decent jobs
opportunities are generated; if digital transformation is inclusive and labour-force capacities 
are nurtured to match the market, all supported by adequate macroeconomic and fiscal 
management, then men, women, youth, and people with disabilities will enjoy shared 
prosperity in accordance with their potential. Important determinants of progress towards 
shared prosperity in the region are the enhancement of social protection, advancement of
women’s and youth’s economic empowerment, and adoption of a human rights approach to 
growth. Initiatives will apply UNDP signature solutions 2, 3, 5 and 6. 
26. To support vulnerable groups in ‘bouncing back better’ after the recent socio-economic 
crises, UNDP will work with the International Labour Organization (ILO) and UNICEF to 
develop social protection solutions for those who have high exposure to multiple risks and 
lack insurance protection. The focus will be on expanding social protection measures that 
enhance the resilience of women, youth, people with disabilities, and small businesses in 
vulnerable sectors such as agriculture, fisheries, retail, and tourism.
27. UNDP will support national governments in developing policies and regulations that 
assist small and medium enterprises, especially those within the blue-green and circular 
economy and those owned by women and youth. Support will aim at improving their 
financial competencies, access to credit, and use of digital and other technologies to enhance 
productivity. UNDP will provide technical support to enable national partners to provide 
tailored business-development support, access to national and international markets, and 
investments in e-governance to boost ease of doing business.
28. In partnership with governments, regional organizations and the private sector, UNDP
will work towards turning the blue economy concept into tangible actions. Across outcome 
areas, UNDP will focus on two broad elements: (a) protecting – and restoring – the existing 
ocean resource base that supplies food and livelihoods to people and delivers coastal 
protection benefits from storm surges and sea level rise, and (b) sustainably and equitably
harnessing opportunities for enhanced or new economic activity. In partnership with UNEP 
and UNCDF, UNDP will focus on finding solutions for fisheries, aquaculture, renewable 
energy, shipping, waste management, tourism, and marine protection. South-South 
iih liddid hllill bhd knowledge about blue-economy demonstration zones and coordination between marine and 
land economy policies.
29. UNDP will scale up efforts with governments, UNCDF, the Sustainable Development 
Goals Fund and international financial institutions to leverage private sector engagement to 
explore new sources of blue and green finance. These will include support to the development 
of innovative products including de-risking instruments, insurance products designed to 
support vulnerable communities, thematic bonds, debt-for-nature swaps (where feasible), 
regional blended finance for renewable energy, infrastructure, and leveraging resources 
through capital markets. UNDP will expand partnerships and build into its support the lessons 
learned from the UNDP-UNCDF Blue Bond initiative, as well as from the joint programme 
on Investing in Coral Reefs and the Blue Economy, which is supported by UNDP, UNCDF, 
UNEP, the Global Fund for Coral Reefs, and the United Nations Joint SDG Fund, leveraging 
philanthropic and development finance to mobilize commercial investments and promote the 
financial sustainability of coral reef conservation and reef-positive livelihoods. UNDP will 
support the Pacific Island Countries and Territories in developing integrated national 
financing frameworks and risk-informed strategies to mobilize public and private financing 
and investment aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals, climate action, and national 
development priorities. 
30. To ensure an inclusive recovery pathway from the economic shocks of the COVID-19
pandemic, UNDP will explore debt management strategies, nature-positive financing, 
climate budgeting, and innovative financing options. UNDP will leverage partnerships with 
the private sector, particularly insurance companies and sovereign wealth holding a pool of 
private capital to invest in green and blue bonds. This will enable countries to sustainably 
invest in sectors for long-term growth while managing their fiscal and macroeconomic 
conditions. In partnership with ESCAP, UNDP will support accelerated action for 
implementing the 2030 Agenda, while monitoring progress and identifying innovative 
policies to ‘build back better’.
Outcome 3. Peace
31. The theory of change underpinning this outcome is that if access to justice and legal 
protection systems are more equitable; if there are accountable and transparent oversight 
institutions; if political processes and systems are inclusive; if national and subnational 
institutions are responsive and efficient; and if public resources are managed transparently 
and efficiently, then countries will be able to uphold human rights and nurture a governance 
environment that ensures an expanded civic space, women’s leadership, harnessing the 
demographic dividend, empowerment of young people, and people’s participation in 
decision-making. Initiatives will apply UNDP signature solutions 2, 3, 5 and 6. 
32. To make institutions responsive to those at risk of being left behind, UNDP will work 
with the European Union, the Governments of Australia and New Zealand, and the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), to strengthen capacities of 
individuals, institutions and systems for rule of law, accountability and transparency in the 
use of public funds, including climate financing and other resources raised in the blueeconomy sector. UNDP will scale up innovative approaches noted in the evaluations, such as 
the Floating Parliament Budget Office that capitalized on digitalization and South-South and 
triangular cooperation in the Pacific to make available expertise and knowledge on budget 
analysis, boost accountability and transparency, and enable effective decision-making. 
Alongside supreme audit institutions and parliaments, civil society will play a significant 
oversight role in social accountability initiatives. In aiding better health governance, UNDP, 
in partnership with Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, will ensure the 
provision of treatment services to all people living with HIV. To ensure access to justice for 
the most marginalized, UNDP, in partnership with OHCHR, will continue to invest in 
expanding legal awareness – especially among the marginalized – and strengthening
capacities of legal aid commissions and other justice institutions, including by adopting 
digital technologies33. UNDP will partner in facilitating a whole-of-society shift towards digital transformation
to make public service provision efficient and effective and improve access for women and 
girls. The multi-country offices will build on the existing successful partnership with the 
International Telecommunication Union, which laid the foundation for digital transformation 
by undertaking country-specific comprehensive digital readiness assessments. UNDP will 
support the establishment of policy frameworks for digital transformation, e-governance 
infrastructure and regulations, effective data governance, and cyber security systems.
Challenges associated with digital technology that can exacerbate existing inequalities and 
reinforce biases will be addressed. To enable social inclusion, UNDP will support initiatives 
that empower people to retain their data rights, ensure informed participation in the digital 
space, and create digital solutions for communication between government and citizens.
34. To facilitate more inclusive governance mechanisms that empower women and youth to 
become leaders across all domains, UNDP will foster wide-ranging partnerships, including 
with political parties and with UN-Women, to support investments in expanding the political 
participation of women, youth, and people with disabilities. UNDP will provide assistance 
across a range of electoral operations: technical advice on laws, electoral violence reduction, 
rules and institutional frameworks, voter awareness, education and registration, and training 
of electoral workers.
35. UNDP will scale up existing national dialogue and civic education strategies bringing 
together officials and communities, especially women and youth. This will contribute to 
building consensus around complex issues such as gender-based violence and ways to 
maximize the Pacific’s demographic dividend. Leadership programmes will be offered to 
engage young people in peacebuilding efforts and increase their participation in social and 
economic life. UNDP will develop and implement strategies that address misinformation, 
disinformation and ‘hate speech’, while ensuring that free-speech rights are not curtailed. 
UNDP will help governments improve access to information as a critical enabler for building
trust and confidence. Scaling up the initiative to address gender-based violence, UNDP will 
work with UN-Women, UNICEF and OHCHR to provide integrated solutions targeting 
gender equality and legal protection, gender-responsive justice, security sector reforms, legal 
aid services, transitional justice, and constitutional reforms, which will help strengthen 
institutions to effectively address gender-based violence.
36. South-South partnerships will be forged – on such themes as anti-corruption, 
parliamentary development, public funds management and elections – with countries of 
similar contexts, particularly Bangladesh, Indonesia, Maldives, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, 
Rwanda, South Africa, and Timor-Leste.
37. Volunteerism ensures that no one is left behind. Across outcomes, UNDP will work with 
United Nations Volunteers and civil society to build partnerships between local volunteer 
groups and United Nations entities. This will aid people-centred implementation of the 
Cooperation Framework and strengthen UNDP strategies to increase citizen participation.
III. Programme and risk management
38. This multi-country programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes is 
prescribed in the UNDP Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal 
Control Framework.
39. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the 
concerned projects.
40. As recommended by the evaluation, programme cohesion between the two multi-country 
offices will be a priority, and monitoring and evaluation capacities will be enhanced, both at 
programme and national levels. UNDP will make a shift towards an issue-based approach, to 
balance short-term incremental changes with medium- and long-term development outcomes, 
with an emphasis on sustainability and scalability of results. 
41. The multi-country offices will adopt a portfolio approach to ensure that interventions 
create value for money through an effective policy-practice nexus, fieldwork-based feedback 
loops, and effective collaboration among outcome areas and between programme and 
operations. The multi-country offices will leverage the global policy network, the regional 
innovation centre and the accelerator labs for this purpose.
42. Risks, including natural and climate-related hazards, internal political tensions and 
global uncertainties, can lead to economic instability and a reduction in resources, which can 
affect results. Risks will be monitored using institutional tracking tools, including social and 
environmental standards and accountability mechanisms. A gender and inclusion policy will 
be designed in conjunction with this programme document to ensure equality for persons 
with disabilities and social protection measures for members of disadvantaged groups. 
43. At the outset of the programme, UNDP, along with United Nations and government 
partners, will develop a business continuity strategy and establish thresholds to trigger 
programme adjustments, including reallocation of resources. The UNDP Enterprise Risk 
Management Policy will be used to identify, manage, and mitigate risks. This will include a 
system for monitoring resource mobilization targets. 
44. To manage risks, forecast anticipatory measures and responses, and support processes 
of monitoring portfolio-level impact, will be put in place. Analytics will be deployed for 
relevant data creation, curation, storage and sharing capabilities. Project design will include 
mitigation measures to address potential implementation slow-downs due to limited incountry capacities and operational challenges. The two multi-country offices will 
systematically invest in strengthening programme management capacity to address issues and 
risks amplified by the growth of the portfolio, as recommended by the recent Fiji multicountry office strategic review.
45. Development assistance to the region has remained stable over the past decade and 
forecasts are encouraging. Opportunities for government financing are slim, given the narrow 
income base of national governments, economic contraction and increasing national debt 
following COVID-19. UNDP will expand partnerships with the private sector, foundations,
and non-traditional donors, especially for investments in testing and scaling up innovative 
solutions. Multi-country offices will ensure that their business processes are efficient and 
cost-effective, including a staffing structure with adequate capacities. Regular monitoring of 
the political economy and scenario planning will inform any alterations to the theory of 
change.
46. As recommended by the independent evaluation, gender will be integral to programming 
and management practices with an aim to win the highest certification for excellence in the 
coming years. UNDP will build a gender architecture in the multi-country offices, moving 
away from mechanical approaches and towards dismantling structural barriers to gender 
equality. UNDP will continue to use the gender marker and improve its performance on the 
gender seal initiative. At least 20 per cent of the budget will be invested in gender 
interventions.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
47. This programme contains a combined results and resources framework for the Fiji and 
Samoa multi-country offices, clarifying both programmatic targets and the resources to be 
mobilized by each office. UNDP will embed a robust evidence-based monitoring system, 
combining qualitative and quantitative methods, use of digital technologies for real-time data, 
and field visits, and will solicit citizen feedback to validate results. Where possible, partners 
will be invited to participate in these processes. 
48. Given limited data availability, UNDP will work with the Global Evaluation Initiative, 
United Nations partners and regional bodies to improve data collection and analysis for 
monitoring the Cooperation Framework, the Sustainable Development Goals, and this 
programme. Aside from strengthening national statistical systems, this will reinforce resultsbased processes, utilize innovative data collection and monitoring methods to identify and 
better target those at risk of being left behind, and capture transformative results. 
49. To address challenges due to geographical isolation, UNDP may partner with local civil 
society organizations and the private sector for monitoring purposes. Three per cent of the 
budget will be earmarked for monitoring, quality assurance and communication of results. 
UNDP will ensure that programming and operational procedures and instruments are agile, 
transparent, accountable, and based on best practices.
50. Country-level project design appraisal committees, to include civil society and donor
partners, will be convened by governments to ensure alignment with outcomes, minimize 
duplication, and maximize opportunities for joint programming with United Nations partners. 
Each of the 14 Pacific Countries and Territories will convene an annual programme review,
bringing in major government and non-government counterparts, to assess progress against 
annual country targets enumerated in the multi-country programme document and plan future 
programming to ensure alignment with national development priorities. The multi-country 
offices will jointly constitute one programme board, which will meet at least twice through
the programme cycle to perform its oversight functions. Apart from project evaluations, two 
thematic evaluations will be undertaken to ensure that the programme strategies continue to 
serve the needs of the countries and territories. Recommendations from the evaluations will 
be utilized as a horizon-scanning knowledge base for pipeline development and adaptive 
management of this programme, and will provide inputs into the Pacific Knowledge Hub.21
51. UNDP will offer its data, including from the ‘Rising up for SIDS’ offer and research
capabilities, to strengthen thought leadership, strategic foresight, and risk monitoring. 
Collaborations with academic institutions and development partners will be accelerated in 
mutual areas of interest. UNDP will invest in communicating its results through stories and 
real-life narratives, using innovative, user-friendly tools – including social media – and will 
make results and lessons learned available to diverse audiences.Annex. Results and resources framework
National priority: Goals 1, 5, 7, 10, 13, 14, and 15
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #1. By 2027, people, communities and institutions are more empowered and resilient to face diverse shocks and stresses, especially 
related to climate variability impacts; and ecosystems and biodiversity are better protected, managed, and restored.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
Cooperation framework 
outcome indicators Data source, frequency Indicative country programme outputs Major partners Estimated cost(in $ thousands)
Indicator 1.1.
Number of countries with 
increased forest area as a 
proportion of total land area
Baseline (2021): 5
Target (2027): 10
Indicator 1.2.
Number of countries with 
increased population 
accessing electricity
Baselines (2021): 11
Target (2027): 14
Indicator 1.3.
Number of countries with 
reduced greenhouse gas 
emissions per capita
Baseline (2021): 3
Target (2027):7
Data source: State 
environment report
Frequency: Biannual
Data source: Pacific data 
hub 
Frequency: Annual
Data source: World Bank
Frequency: Biannual
Output 1.1. Enhanced gender-responsive actions on climate change 
adaptation, mitigation, and climate security across sectors implemented
Indicator 1.1.1.
Number of effective initiatives undertaken to accelerate implementation of 
nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement (refer IRRF 1.1.2)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 24
Samoa MCO: 6
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 49
Samoa MCO: 15
Data source: Ministerial reports, submissions
Indicator 1.1.2.
Amount (megawatts) of renewable energy capacity installed (refer IRRF 5.2)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 5
Samoa MCO: 0
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 36
Samoa MCO: 3
Data source: Global Environment Fund dashboard
Indicator 1.1.3.
Number of people directly benefiting from initiatives to protect nature and promote 
sustainable use of resources (refer IRRF 4.1.1)
Fiji MCO baseline (2021)
Female: 176,599
Male: 200,301
Fiji MCO target (2027)
Female:500,000
Male: 500,000
Data source: Government annual reports 
Government partners
Government ministries and 
departments of the 14
countries covering climate 
change, disasters, 
emergencies, energy, 
environment, finance, 
fisheries, natural resources, 
planning, and security, and
central government 
organizations
United Nations partners
UNEP, IOM, UN-Women 
Office for the Coordination 
of Humanitarian Affairs 
(UNOCHA) United 
Nations Office for Disaster 
Risks Reduction
UNICEF, UNCDF
United Nations Office for 
South-South Cooperation 
(UNOSSC) World Bank
Asian Development Bank
Asian Infrastructure 
Investment Bank
Donor partners
European Union
United States of America
Governments of Australia, 
New Zealand, India, United 
Kingdom, Japan, Sweden, 
Korea, and China
Global Environment Fund 
Green Climate Fund, 
Multi-Partner Trust Fund
Fiji multi-country 
office (MCO)
Regular: 4,665.5
Other: 182,798.974
Samoa MCO
Regular 1,185
Other 37,314.975Output 1.2. Governance systems are risk-informed to manage and finance 
disasters and shocks.
Indicator 1.2.1.
Number of risk-informed development strategies at national and community levels 
adopted (refer IRRF 3.1.1)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 11
Samoa MCO: 65
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 31
Samoa MCO: 95
Data source: Evaluation reports
Indicator 1.2.2.
Number of early end-to-end warning systems effectively functioning through 
UNDP support (refer IRRF 3.1.2)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 44
Samoa MCO: 8
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 90
Samoa MCO: 11 
Data source: Weather-Ready Pacific report
Output 1.3. Institutions and communities have improved capacities to protect 
and manage ocean and land ecosystems.
Indicator 1.3.1.
Number of policies and plans adopted to support natural resources management
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 24
Samoa MCO: 63
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 54
Samoa MCO: 99
Data source: Relevant line ministries 
Indicator 1.3.2.
Area in hectares of land (including marine, terrestrial, coastal, wetlands) created or 
under improved practices with UNDP support (refer IRRF 4.1.2)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 17,28,789
Samoa MCO: 21,09,18,697
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 30,00,000
Samoa MCO: 23,00,10,991
Data source: Relevant line ministries
Regional partners
Council of Regional 
Organizations in the Pacific 
agencies
Civil society 
organizations and other 
partners
International Union of 
Conservation for Nature 
World Wildlife Fund 
Wildlife Conservation 
Society
Conservation International 
WanSmol Bag
Micronesia Conservation 
Trust
Jojikum Youth GroupIndicator 1.3.3.
Number of innovative and effective solid waste management measures supported
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 9
Samoa MCO: 5
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 19
Samoa MCO: 11 
Data source: State of Environment and Conservation in the Pacific Islands report 
National priority: Goals 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 17
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #2. By 2027, more people, especially those at risk of being left behind, contribute to and benefit from sustainable, resilient, diversified, inclusive 
and human-centred socio-economic systems with decent work and equal livelihoods opportunities, reducing inequalities and ensuring shared prosperity.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions
Indicator 2.1.
Number of countries with 
reduced proportion on 
population living below the 
national poverty line
Baseline (2021): 3 
Target (2027): 12
Indicator 2.2.
No. of countries with adults 
(15 years and older) with an 
account at a bank or other 
financial institution or with 
a mobile-money-service 
provider 
Baseline (2021): 5
Target (2027): 10
Indicator 2.3.
Number of countries with 
increased approved budget 
for achieving the
Sustainable Development 
Goals(SDGs)
Baseline (2021): 1
Target (2027): 13
Data source: Pacific data 
hub
Frequency: Biannual
Data source: Pacific data 
hub
Frequency: Biannual
Data source: Government 
expenditure reports and 
budget analyses
Frequency: Annual 
Output 2.1. Policies and programmes in place to support the complementary 
strategies of improving livelihoods opportunities and social protection for 
those at risk of being left behind
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of people benefiting from jobs and improved livelihoods 
opportunities from economic recovery interventions (refer IRRF 3.3.1)
Fiji MCO baseline (2021): 300,000
 Female: 125,000 
 Male: 175, 000
 Poor (income measure): 250,000 
 Youth: 100, 000 
 Persons with disabilities: 20,000
Fiji MCO target (2027): 500,000 
 Female: 250,000 
 Male: 250, 000 
 Poor (income measure): 400,000 
 Youth: 350,000 
 Persons with disabilities: 50,000
Data source: Household Income and Expenditure Survey and government reports. 
Indicator 2.1.2.
Number of new types of effective gender-sensitive social protection instruments
adopted (refer IRRF 1.2.1)
Baseline (2021): 
Fiji MCO: 0
Samoa MCO: 0
Target (2027):
Fiji MCO: 3
Samoa MCO: 1
Data source: Reserve Bank, Ministry of Finance, media reports
Government partners
Ministry of Finance 
Ministry of Planning,
Statistics and Economy, 
Ministry of Women
Ministry of Social Welfare, 
Children and Poverty 
Alleviation Ministry of 
Agriculture Ministry of 
Trade
Ministry of Commerce, 
Industry and Labour 
Ministry of Youth of all the 
14 Pacific countries and 
territories
United Nations partners
ILO, UN-Women, 
UNCDF, UNOSSC
Donor partners
European Union, 
Governments of Australia, 
India, New Zealand,
United Kingdom
Multi-Partner Trust Fund
Regional partners
Council of Regional 
Organizations in the Pacific 
agencies
Fiji MCO 
Regular: 1,866.2
Other: 54,751.008
Samoa MCO
Regular 355,550
Other 11,194.493Indicator 2.1.3.
Number of people benefiting from by disaster and climate risk insurance through 
UNDP support (refer IRRF outcome 3 indicator)
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 1,300 (32% women, no one living with disability)
Samoa MCO: 0
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 6,300 (50% women, 18% living with disabilities)
Samoa MCO: 200 (50% women, 18% living with disabilities)
Data source: Pay out data by insurance companies
Output 2.2. Policy frameworks and financing available to leverage the 
potential of blue-green economy 
Indicator 2.2.1.
Number of countries that have developed integrated and inclusive blue-green 
economy strategies
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 1
Samoa MCO: 0
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 4 
Samoa MCO: 2 
Data source: Relevant ministries 
Indicator 2.2.2.
Number of countries that have undertaken regulatory assessments for accessing 
innovative finance 
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 1
Samoa MCO: 1
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 5 
Samoa MCO: 3 
Data source: Innovative financing assessment reports
Indicator 2.2.3.
Volume of investment leveraged to support blue-green recovery pathways
(refer IRRF5.2.3)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: $18 million 
Samoa MCO: $10.7 million
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: $80 million
Samoa MCO: $13.2 million
Data source: Ministry of Economy
Civil society 
organizations, private 
sector, and other partners
Vanuatu Business Initiative
Gizo Women in Business 
Development Sustainability
Samoa Chamber of 
Commerce 
Samoa Business Hub 
Samoa Information 
Technology Association
National University of 
Samoa
Australia and New Zealand 
BankOutput 2.3. Gender-sensitive mechanisms in place to accelerate achievement of 
the SDGs and monitor progress 
Indicator 2.3.1.
Number of resolutions adopted by the regional task force for acceleration of 
achievement of SDGs
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 1
Samoa MCO: 0
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 6
Samoa MCO: 1
Data source: Regional task force meeting reports
Indicator 2.3.2.
Number of countries which have formulated gender-sensitive Integrated Financing 
Frameworks 
Baseline (2021: 
Fiji MCO: 1
Samoa MCO: 1
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 4
Samoa MCO: 2
Data source: Government publications
Indicator 2.3.3.
Number of countries that have completed Voluntary National Reviews
(refer IRRF 1.1.3)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 10
Samoa MCO: 1
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 18
Samoa MCO: 2
Data source: Voluntary National Review reports
National priority or goal: SDGs 5, 10, 11 and 16
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #3. By 2027, people enjoy and contribute to more accountable, inclusive, resilient and responsive governance systems that promote gender 
equality, climate security, justice and peace, ensure participation, and protect their human rights.
Related Strategic Plan outcome: No-one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
Indicator 3.1.
Number of countries with 
increased proportion of 
seats held by women in 
(a) national parliaments, and 
(b) local governments
Baseline (2021): 8 
Data source: World Bank
Frequency: Annual 
Output 3.1. Governance institutions are accountable and have improved 
capacities for service delivery
Indicator 3.1.1.
Extent to which accountability and anti-corruption measures are integrated into the 
management of public resources (refer IRRF 2.1.1)
Government partners
Parliaments, Ministries of 
Justice, Electoral 
Management Bodies, 
Ministries of Women 
Legal Aid Commissions 
Ministries of Health 
Fiji MCO 
Regular: 2,799.3
Other: 128,119.018
Samoa MCO 
Regular: 2,410.5Target (2027): 14
Indicator 3.2.
Number of countries with 
increased individuals using 
the internet
Baseline (2021): 3
Target (2027): 14
Indicator 3.3.
No. of countries with 
increased positions in 
national and local 
institutions, including 
(a) the legislatures; (b) the 
public service; and (c) the 
judiciary, compared to 
national distributions, by 
sex, age, persons with 
disabilities and population 
groups
Baseline (2021): 7
Target (2027):12
Data source: World Bank
Frequency: Annual 
Data source: World Bank
Frequency: Biannual 
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 2
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 3 
Data source: Supreme audit institutions and ministries
Rating scale 
1= Inadequate
2 =Partial 
3 =Moderate
4=Largely
Indicator 3.1.2.
Number of public administration institutions with improved core capacities for 
service delivery including for justice (refer IRRF 2.2.1)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 12
Samoa MCO: 5
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 16
Samoa MCO:7
Data source: Ministries of Justice, legal aid institutions
Indicator 3.1.3.
Percentage of people living with HIV who are receiving antiretroviral therapy 
(IRRF 1.4.1)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 86%, of whom 40% are women
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 90%, of whom 50% are women
Data source: National HIV registers
Indicator 3.1.4.
Number of gender-sensitive initiatives that promote enabling digital ecosystems 
that are affordable, accessible, trusted, and secure (refer IRRF E.1.1)
Baseline (2021)
Fiji MCO: 9
Samoa MCO: 9
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 24
Samoa MCO: 16
Data source: Ministerial Reports, civil society 
Output 3.2. Institutions and systems accelerate inclusive development through 
responsive, participatory, and transparent governance processes
Indicator 3.2.1.
Number of effective and active partnerships in place to advance women’s political 
leadership and participation (refer IRRF 6.2.2)
Auditor General’s office 
and other regulatory bodies 
United Nations partners
UN-Women, OCHA, 
UNOSSC, OHCHR, 
UNODC, IOM, UNICEF, 
UNFPA
Donor partners
European Union 
Governments of Australia, 
New Zealand, India, United 
Kingdom, and Japan
Regional partners
Pacific Sexual Gender 
Diversity Network
Pacific Islands Association 
of Non-Governmental 
Organizations. 
Pacific Disability Forum
Other partners
National Human Rights 
Institute
National University of 
Samoa
Other: 26,675.482Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 4 
Samoa MCO: 2
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 8
Samoa MCO: 3 
Data source: Civil society and media 
Indicator 3.2.2.
Number of procedural reforms adopted by electoral management bodies 
(IRRF 2.4.1)
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 6
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 12
Data source:Electoral management bodies 
Indicator 3.2.3.
Number of parliament committees with improved capacities that are conducting
inclusive, accountable law-making and oversight (refer IRRF 2.4.1)
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 3 
Samoa MCO: 1
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 6
Samoa MCO: 2
Data source: Hansard, annual reports of parliaments
Output 3.3. State-society relationships are more resilient to stressors and are
inclusive in relation to women, youth, and people with disabilities 
Indicator 3.3.1.
Number of initiatives to effectively protect and promote inclusive spaces, 
mechanisms, and capacities for public dialogue (refer IRRF 2.4.5)
Baseline (2021) 
Fiji MCO: 6
Samoa MCO: 2
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 10 
Samoa MCO: 6
Data source: Universal Periodic Review shadow reports
Indicator 3.3.2.
Extent to which institutions have the capacities to address conflict drivers and 
strengthen social cohesion (refer IRRF 3.2.1)
Baseline (2021
Fiji MCO: 1
Samoa MCO: 1Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 2
Samoa: 2
Data source: Ministerial reports
Rating scale
1= Inadequate
2 =Partial 
3 =Moderate
4=Largely
Indicator 3.3.3.
Number of entities with strengthened capacities that are implementing legislation, 
policies, action plans to prevent gender-based violence (Refer IRRF 6.3.3)
Baseline (2021: 
Fiji MCO: 4 
Samoa MCO: 7 
Target (2027)
Fiji MCO: 8 
Samoa MCO: 8
Data source: Ministry of Justice, human rights institutions