File Name: WSM-NEP-2007-EN
Year: 2007
Country Name: Samoa
Country Code: WSM
Category: NEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2007
Start Year: 2007
End Year: nan
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

ll
'l"! There is no restriction on the quotation or !
I " reproduction of any part of this publication, I "
'l" provided that the source is acknowledged 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" Ministry of Finance 'l" ft Economic Policy and Planning o;vision 1t
AlIJ:. Private Mail Bag AlIJ:.
I" Apia I "
'l" ~M 'l"
AlIJ:. Telephone: 685 34333/34341 Fax: 685 21312 AlIJ:.
I " Email: eppd@mof.gov.ws I "
'l" 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l"
'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" 'l"
'l" June 2007 'l"management, strategic planning, privatization, human resource management as well as initiatives focusing on
I. . improving efficiency and effective service delivery. As a result, the Samoan economy has enjoyed strong
economic growth. This is reflected with GOP per capita increasing from $3,650 SAT in 1994 to $6,972 SAT by
2006.
I This increased in monetization of the economy, higher level of sophistication have culminated in a . ...
growing demand for energy over the last 20 years. Preference for electricity and fossil fuelled equipment has
... grown witnessed in a shift from traditional energy sources such as biomass to more convenient sources like ..
. ... fossil fuel and gas. The increase and diversity in energy demand together with the high associated costs highlights the need for a , ...
4:- comprehensive framework to guide and manage the growing energy sector in Samoa. ..
' " Energy developments in Samoa have been fragmented with key energy providers working very much in isolation. Such an , ... -f' arrangement led to weak coordination with lost opportunities to synthesize common objectives and targets. Hence it is my pleasure
4:- to present this first Samoa National Energy Policy (SNEP). This policy will provide a clear direction for all energy developments in 4:- , ... Samoa. The vision for the Samoa National Energy Policy is lito enhance the quality of life for all through access to reliable, , ... 4:- affordable and environmentally sound energy services and supply". This vision supports the national vision for "Improved .. , . QuaUty of Life" as stipulated in the recent Strategy for the Development of Samoa. , ... -t' In support of the Energy sector vision, the overarching goal is lito increase the share and contribution of renewable energy -t'
4:- in mass production and energy services and supply by 20% by year 2030". This would be achieved with the successful ..
, ... implementation of the strategies and associated activities relating to, Energy Planning and Management, Petroleum. Electricity, , ... -f' Transport and Renewable Energy. Energy efficiency and conservation, environmental and social aspects, human and institutional "
.. capacity, capital resource constraints, legal framework, promotion and dissemination of information and other cross cutting issues are
, addressed and reflected under these 5 strategic areas. ,
.. In formulating the Samoa National Energy Policy, a taskforce comprising of key energy stakeholders compiled a first draft based
, ... on information and data gathered from all energy stakeholders. Feedback from severaL workshops conducted in both Upolu and Savaii , "
-f' helped improve this draft and was then circulated again to respective energy stakeholders for further comments. Needless to say, this
was a highly consultative document.
" The release of the Samoa National Energy Policy is timely with the recent surges in oil prices and Samoa's growing demand and -f' .,. dependency on fossil fueL Renewed global interest in exploring renewable energy sources to substitute fossil fuels makes this JIk. , document critical. Development of renewable energy is a must for any long term development plans for Samoa. The Samoa National ,
" Energy Policy will provide the framework to coordinate both our domestically financed efforts as well as regional and bilateral "
assistance in the energy sector. "
" I commend this document for aU. _
Ni~~Hang MINISTER OF FINANCE1: The Minister of Finance and Energy and the management of the Ministry of Finance would like to 1: 1: acknowledge the collaboration effort of representatives of the following organizations who made the 1: 1: development and finalization of the first Samoa National Energy Policy possible. Special faafetai goes out 1: 1: to the UNDP Samoa and Government of Denmark for funding the Technical Assistance provided under the ...
Pacific Island Energy Policies and Strategic Action Plans (pIEPSAP) project executed by the South Pacific I '
1: Applied Geoscience Commission which greatly assisted the finalization of this policy and the development 1: 1: of a Strategic Action Plan as well as for financing the printing and partially financing the publishing of the 1: 1: Samoa National Energy Policy. 1:
1: 1. SNEP Core Team Members 1: 1: a. Office of the Attorney General 1: 1: b. Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Meteorology 1: ... c. Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure ...
I ' 2. SNEP National Team Members I '
1: a. Electric Power Corporation; 1: 1: b. Ministry of Education, Sports and Cultural Affairs; 1: 1: c. Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Meteorology; 1: ... d. Ministry of Works, Transport and Infrastructure; ...
I ' e. Office of the Attorney General; I '
1: f. Samoa Association for Manufacturers and Exporters; 1: 1: g. Samoa Chamber of Commerce; 1: ... h. Samoa Umbrella for Non Government Organisations; ...
I ' i. United Nations Development Program - Samoa. I '
1: 3. Stakeholder Consultation with all Energy Stakeholders from Government, Non Government 1: 1: Organisations, Business Community and the Private Sector. 1:
1: 1:
11FOREWORD 3
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 4
ViSiON 7
GOALS 7 't
SAMOA NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY FRAMEWORK 8
OVERVIEW OF THE ECONOMY 9
OVERVIEW OF THE ENERGY SECTOR 9
ENERGY PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT 13
RENEWABLE ENERGY 15
ELECTRICITY 18
"f' PETROLEUM 20 t'
t: TRANSPORT 221ADO Automotive Diesel Oil1
BOC British Oxygen Company
COM Clean Development Mechanism
I" DPK Dual Purpose KeroseneI'
EIA Environment Impact Assessment
EPC Electric Power Corporation
, ... GDP Gross Domestic Product. ""
GHG Greenhouse Gas Emissions"fr
HIES Household Income and Expenditure Survey
I" LDS Latter Days SaintsI"
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gas
I" MNRE Ministry of Natural Resources and EnvironmentI'
PICs Pacific Island Countries
PIEPP Pacific Islands Energy Policy and Plan
I" PIEPSAP Pacific Island Energy Policies and Strategic Action PlansI"
PI REP Pacific Islands Renewable Energy Project
PPS Petroleum Products Supplies
I" PREGA Promotion of Renewable Energy, Energy efficiency and Greenhouse Gas AbatementI'
,.. RDIS Research and Development Institute of Samoa fr
RE Renewable Energy
REEP Renewable Energy and Efficiency Program
REP-PoR Regional Energy Program on Poverty Reduction
RETs Renewable Energy Technologies
I" RFP Request for Proposals1'
SDS Strategy for the Development of Samoa
1• SES Statement of Economic StrategyI"
SNEP Samoa National Energy Policy
SSOpRPEApC South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission
, ... South Pacific Regionat Environment Program. ""
-. TA Technical Assistance 4:- I " TCB Transport Control Board I "
TLB Taro Leaf Blight
ULP Unleaded Petrol
USD United States of America Dollarf: VISION f: ! To enhance the quality of life for all through access to reliable, !
affordable and environmentally sound energy services and supply
'f: GOALS 'f: 'f: 1: "To increase the share of mass production from renewable sources to 20% by year 2030" 'f:
'f: 2: "To increase the contribution of Renewable Energy for energy services and supply by 20% by 'f:
'f: ~wm." 'f:
'f: 'f:
'f: 'f: f' In support of the Energy Sector vision, the goal is twofold, "to increase the share of mass production from renewable sources to 'f:
'f: 20% by year 2030 and "to increase the contribution of Renewable Energy to energy services and supply to 20% by year 2030." "
In achieving the above vision, it relies on the successful implementation of the strategies and associated activities in Energy
f' Planning and Management, Renewable Energy Petroleum, Electricity, and Transport. Cross cutting issues such as, Energy t'
'f'- Efficiency and Conservation, Environmental and Social aspects, Human and Institutional Capacity, Capital Resource 'f:
'f: Constraints, Legal framework and Promotion and Dissemination of Information are reflected in each section. 'f:
; This vision snpports the overall national vision, "Improved Qnality of Life for all" as stated in the Strategy for the Development ;
f' of Samoa 2005-2007 with a related theme, "Enhancing People's Choices" focusing on improving access to every opportunity one
d~i~
'f: 'f:
'f: 'f:s G
; n n n n n ;
En"'IY Plannln. Renewable E1ectrtcllY PetrOleum·.c ; Transport '.'
and Manaaement En"'IY
; Strat~l~ ;
; C Work Plan ;
In addition to the five strategic areas highlighted in the diagram above, it is important
""" to note that there are five cross cutting areas that are also considered when formulating the policy statements for each """
I ' strategic area. These areas include: I '
1. Energy Efficiency and Conservation
2. Environmental and Social aspects
3. Human and Institutional Capacity. ... e pswo decdes Sos de soud pogess es oecooc d socdeveope. e ey 9905, wo 
f' cyclones caused major devastation to the economy and in 1994 the Taro Leaf Blight destroyed Samoa 's major export earning ft .. commodity, taro. However, infrastructure has been restored, and macroeconomic stability ..
I' has been achieved as a result of the bold reforms measures taken by government in the public I -
sector, financiaL sector and to the tax and tariff systems. The economy is now benefiting ..
,... from strong economic growth . SociaL indicators have improved and a host of activities are
. "" presently directed to improving health and education. I
Government is convinced that challenges remain and the current Strategy for the
-'II:- Development of Samoa (50S) 2005-2007 clearly sets out government's commitment to -'II:-
' "" enhancing people's choices as part of its vision to improve the quality of life for all. The •
government believes that the cornerstone for a healthy and competitive economy is
.-. Figure I: Conservation areas are dependent upon the achievement of the following key strategic outcomes. Private sector .-. . ... promoted to preserve the natural development anticipates increasing investments to create employment opportunities; . ... ftt beauty or our natural environment. Agriculture development aims to accelerate agricultural production (with over 80% of the
population dependent upon agriculture); Tourism development plans to promote a balanced and sustainable framework
(emphasis on the development of the rural area) while Community development supports social and economic opportunities in ftt .-. the communities; Education and Health development are determined to improve student learning outcomes with specific .-.
..y;: emphasis on raising literacy and numeracy level and improve health standards for all respectively. ..y;:
Economic Performance 1'-' .-. Development indicators achieved in the last five years illustrate that Samoa has continued .-.
. ... to move forward in the social and economic front. Economic activity has continued to grow . ...
strongly with real GOP growth averaging over 4 percent during the last 5 year. This is
.-. considered a remarkable performance in view of global and domestic uncertainties. It is .-.
• . even more rewarding to know that we have consistently exceeded the average growth rate , ... 1'-' of the Pacific region economies.
ftt Selected economic indicators in the year to end 2006 showed continuing strong growth in
.-. the economy as follows: Figure 2: Public transport is .-.
, .. • The nominal GOP generated over the twelve months ending December 2006 encouraged to promote efficient use or . ..
exceeded the billion mark with $1 .25 billion tala . This was equivalent to a per transportation thus lessen the burning ;ye: .-. capita income of $6,972 tala. In real terms GOP grew by 2.6%over the comparable orfossil ruels and traffic congestion. .-.
I' 2005 period. Commerce was the most important contributor, accounting for 1.1 I "
ft iThiflbil iididilblil, , g g
• Exports at end December 2006 amounted to $28.75 million, down by 14.0%compared
to 2005. I "
• The strong growth in the economy culminated in the strong surge in aH components
of imports to total $596.0 million at end 2006. Petroleum imports totalled $102.7
million up by 8.1%over the comparabLe 2005 period. I "
• The continuing high leveL of remittances up by 25.0% over in 2006 as well as the
4:- strong and positive growth in tourism activity culminated in the strong growth in the
I " commerce industry dUring this period . I "
• Foreign exchange reserves at end December 2006 was estimated at $215.65 million
Figure 3: Traffic congestion is ~quivalent to 4.4 months import cover which was above the target of 4 months 4:-
I " seen as a problem in the urban Import cover. . "
area before and after work every • The annual average rate of inflation as of end December 2006 stood at 3.8 percent. "
day.
I " OVERVIEW OF THE ENERGY SECTOR I "
TotaL demand for energy has grown over the Last 20 years. The preference for eLectricity
and fossil fuelted equipment, appliances has also grown. This increase in demand is mainly in petroleum products for
• transportation and electricity generation and to a (esser extent cooking. • "
Demand for electricity has increased by around 6 percent per annum Total imports 1999-2006
dUring the last decade. The increase in energy demand was accompanied . -.. 85,000,000 f'r
with a gradual shift from indigenous energy sources such as biomass to ~_: 80,000,000
more convenient sources such as petroleum and LPG. Between 1981 and 75,000,000
1" 200 h .= 70,000,000 1, t e percentage of household cooking with wood dropped from 73%to .{! 65,000,000
62% of households in Samoa.' Similarly the number of households using 60,000,000
cooking with charcoal dropped from 15% to only 1%in 2001 . There is an ,- i~ gg~:gg~
. " abundance of biomass available as well as other forms of energy, hence qt # *.... ~'1- *"J ~':> #' •"
energy diversification based on indigenous .... '\i '\i '1-"5 <t: '1-"5 '1-"5 '\i
energy sources will be encouraged and years
. ... promoted in a more sustainable manner. •...
Fuel imports by both government and the private sector alike has increased by about 30%between
1998 and 2006 and saLes have increased by over 20%dUring this period. Ln Samoa's First NationaL
I " Communication to the United Nations Framework Convention in 1999, it specifies that in spite of
Samoa's relatively small GHG emissions, there is a parallel increasing trend in each of the GHG
! aso epassed te pootooabe eeabe eegy as oe ote ey potes tat oud be addessed te eegy t
."... sector which compliments the priorities in the SOS 2005,2007. ."...
."... Reliable, affordable and environmentally sound energy supply and services are crucial to ."...
meeting the increased demand. Energy efficiency and conservation or demand side
I management are promoted for the end user to ensure that energy is used wisely and I
efficiently resulting in energy savings. These measures will contribute to sustainable energy
4:- development thus improve quality of life for all through minimising environmental diverse
I " effects maximising benefits. Sustainable development in its narrowest form will always be I "
4:- associated with efficient and reliable supporting services, such as electricity, 4:- , ... transportation, communication and other services. •...
."... ."...
."... Figure 4: The less impact that Enersv Suppliers:
energy developments have on the Energy suppliers in the country are Electric Power I "
natural environment the more Corporation (EPC), SheU/PPS, British Oxygen ."...
favourable they become. Company (BOC) Gas and Origin Energy. EPC is a fc:'
Government owned corporation and the sale
."... producer and supplier of electricity in Samoa. Shell/PPS imports and distributes ."...
4:- petroleum products in the whole country. The rationalisation of petroleum supply and 4:-
' "" distribution exercise carries out a Request for Proposal tendering process every 5 years I "
."... to select suppliers. Mobil Oil Ltd won the first tender and supplied and distributed 4:-
."...
petroleum products in Samoa from 1998 to 2003. SheLL and Petroleum Products Figure 5: Petroleum Products Supplies ."... 1" Ltd with joint venture with Shell is
Supplies Ltd entered into a joint venture and took over from Mobil in 2003 until 2008. currently supplying and distributing
Government has no direct intervention or control over its operations but it sets and petroleum products in Samoa. fr ,.... monitors fuel prices every month based on international fuel prices and profit margin ,....
I ' negotiated during the Request for Proposals (RFP) process. I '
."... Energy Consumption: t'
Throughout the 1990s, Samoa has undergone a rapid transformation towards a commercial energy supply based on imported ."...
4:- petroleum and hydropower'generated electricity. The transformation has been driven primarily by rapidly increasing demand 4:-
' "" for electricity as well as ground and sea transport. Total energy demand for Samoa is met by 3 main sources, biomass, fossil . ""
fuels and hydro. The estimated final consumption of energy with all sources combined was eqUivalent to around 130,000 tonnes t'
4:- of oil in 2000. Of this demand, 47% is met by biomass, 45% by petroleum products while the remaining 8% was supplied by 4:-
' " Hydropower. Biomass is used mainly for household cooking whereas the major part of petroleum products is used by the . "
t' d liiiThlii(ldd i) d "g y , y
;a, Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) 91 %of all households use electricity for
lighting compared to less than 9%using kerosene. In contrast, only 2.6%use electricity
I for cooking and most of these households are in Apia. Biomass is still the dominating I
;a, cooking fuel, especially in rural areas with 74% of all households cooking with biomass ;a,
I ' compared to only 37%of Apia households. Around 8.3% of all households use LPG for I '
'f' cooking even though it is cheaper than electricity and easier to use than biomass. f'
f- Growth in all forms of commercial energy demand is expected to continue over the next
;a, 10 to 20 years supported with the increases in vehicles and demand for electricity. A ;a,
I significant component of fuel imports is for electricity generation and future energy ,
demand as electricity will have to be met either by developing new hydro stations, ft
imported dieseL fuel and other renewable energy sources. The increasing fueL
consumption poses concerns on the environmental impacts in terms of contamination Figure 6: Plans are in place to upgrade standards and conditions of existing and 'f' from poor handling and management of fuel and oiL. The unloading and storage of new service stations as part of petroleum f'"
petroLeum products as well as handling and storage of waste oil and other petroleum by· licence requirements.
products needs to be managed properly. Energy efficiency and conservation measures ...
are not actively pursued and should be encouraged as immediate savings are ...
• "" anticipated. This would minimise the strain in meeting energy demand as well as reducing the negative environmentaL impacts I '"
and other diverse effects. Due to the continuous increase in fuel prices and Samoa's
heavy reliance on fossil fuel to meet its demand, renewable energy and indigenous
1-' energy sources are promoted and encouraged to be used as a substitute. RecentLy. . "" 'f' research studies into renewabLe energy development in Samoa has been boosted with t'
the establishment of the Research and Development Institute of Samoa which has
. "" Renewable Energy as one of its two main research areas. Samoa acknowledges the . ...
... fact that fossil fuel being a finite source may not be available in the future. Hence,
1- clear legislations and guidelines are to be put in place to guide the developments and I'
... investments in the energy sector in order to promote sustainable devetopment and I . Figure 7: The new developments . ... contributed to the growing energy demand ensure reliable, affordable and environmentally sound energy services and supply are
. "" in addition to the growing number of provided. Appropriate policy statements will also ensure environmental considerations . "
vehicles and demand for electricity. are strictly adhered to. t'Objective: Efficient and effective coordination and management of the Energy sector.
;i, Energy coordination and management has gradually evolved from being a single KEY ISSUES: ;i,
a'" person position within the Administration Division to a separate unit with the ./ Institutional Structure j '"
Ministry of Finance. This reflects the growing importance of the energy sector and Strengthening including a well
the role of this unit to the development and management of this sector. The established Regulatory Body ./ A firm legal framework for
broadening role for energy management stems from overseeing and coordinating planning and management of the
national activities for donor-supported energy projects, to developing, energy sector;
;i, coordinating and implementing of the Samoa National Energy Policy (SNEP) in ./ Capacity and Resources ;i,
I " collaboration with all relevant energy stakeholders. The Energy Unit is also strengthen; I"
responsible for the administration of the Petroleum Act which includes issuance ./ An effective and reliable
;i, of petroleum licence and the rationalisation exercise of the supply and Database Management System; ;i,
I " distribution of petroleum products in Samoa. This exercise includes the I -
coordination and publishing of monthly fuel price notices, collecting and reconciling levy payments, managing of funding
;i, arrangements for petroleum infrastructure and coordination of the Request for Proposals process for the 5 year term ;i,
I - contract for petroleum supply and distribution. Other duties include the development of an energy supply and demand I "
database to collect and compile all energy related information in the country. Energy development in Samoa is classified
;i, into 4 main energy sub-sectors namely, Renewable Energy, Petroleum, Electricity and Transport. The Electric Power ;i,
I " Corporation has lead developments in electricity production and distribution investing heavily in renewable energy and I '
diesel generation technologies while the Ministry of
Finance has been administrating petroleum issues. ...
I " Energy issues within the transport sector have been I "
incorporated into the relevant agencies' planning and
management policies.
Developments in the field of Renewable Energy have
;i, been done on an ad·hoc basis driven mainly by the ;i,
I " various donor funded projects with their separate I "
coordinating committees. This current situation of
... management and coordination of activities in the
, . energy sector is qUite immense, inefficient and I "
ineffective because of the spread out of responsibilities
and functions within different government ministriesegaaeoequed o eecey paad coodae eegy deeopeSaoaoog e egy Uo J
become a separate division with the provision of the enhanced capacity and appropriate resources should enable the Unit
... to plan, manage and monitor the sector more effectively. In support, a Regulatory Body must be well established with ...
I " appropriate mandate and immediate measures to govern and strengthen energy sector management. This Body must J"
comprise of key energy Stakeholders from both government and the private sector with the Energy Unit playing a
~retariatrole.
- ',' In addition, there is limitation on readily available statistics that forms the ~~ \ '1 backbone to any in-depth analysis in the sector. To this effect, there is a need for
an effective and reliable database management system. This is considered vital in
I strengthening energy planning and management issues. The development of this
... database must also involve all relevant ministries and energy stakeholders to obtain ...
, accurate data. ,
! The efficiency and effectiveness gains in the four areas identified above will have !
I - significant positive impact both on the macro level as well as within each industry in I "
Figure 8: Stakeholder consultations and Samoa and should be viciously pursued. Certain consideration, however, are to be
collaboration with relevant ministries and made with regards to the strong demand for energy and the significant costs
, -.. organisations is a must for effective associated with energy development both on the financial, economic and "
planning and management as well as environmental costs. ... ' "" monitorine: and evaluation. IObjective: To successfully change from fossil fuel dependency to Renewable Energy investment.
.llko Economic development over the last decade has resulted in a higher .llko
I ' dependency on fossil fuel. Increasing income has increased purchasing KEY ISSUES: I ' ./ Use of indigenous energy sources .. I ' power thus led to affording more expensive choices especially in encouraged; I '
.. transportation, electrical appliances, lighting and cooking which are ./ Public knowledge and understanding of
I ' normally fuelled by fossil fuels. This increasing demand for fossil fuel has Costs and Benefits of Renewable I '
1'" been less sensitive to gradual increases in oil prices. The high preference Energy enhanced. t"
for fossil fuel is a combination of convenience and short-term economic ./ Partnership with communities and all
. ... advantages. However, scientific research concludes that fossil fuel will be energy stakeholders and development . ...
-.J:. exhausted within the next century. partners strengthen; . "" ./ Local expertise In Renewable Energy I .
.. Technologies improved; .,. . .. In addition to the increasing demand, continuous demand from developing ./ Use of Research and Development . ..
;yr countries such as China prompt others to speculate that fossil fuel could be Institute of Samoa findings encouraged;
.llko exhausted sooner than was previously estimated. Hence it is crucial that .llko
I ' alternative energy sources are promoted and widely used. I '
During the high oil prices of the 1980's, there was a strong push for renewable energy
globally. Renewable initiatives in Samoa during this time, culminated in the wide
.llko development of hydropower generation a decade later. Also, developments in .llko
I ' telecommunication in Samoa relied on the use of small stand-alone photovoltaic panels I '
that powered telecommunication outlets in rural areas with no access to electricity. The
.llko high initial costs at the time (technologic constraints) as well as the lack of proper .llko
I ' maintenance lead to the less economical results for photovoltaic whilst hydropower I .
1'- continued to be a viable renewable energy source. The main restriction on recent
.... hydropower initiatives was access to appropriate natural water resources and funding ....
• . limitations. •..
The recent high oil prices which started to climb again from 2004 pledge the government
.... Figure 9: Indigenous sources of to commit to renewable energy. The establishment of the Research and Development .... • energy is still widely used • • .... however, efficient use of these Institute of Samoa (RDIS) that has Renewable Energy development as one of its 2 main ...
• . sources are encouraged. faculties of studies confirm this commitment to further explore the feasibility of RE ..
.llko development in Samoa. The associated environmentally and cleaner nature of renewable k. energy makes it an attractive substitute for fossil fuel. Fossil fuel tends to have a long-term detrimental effect on the .llko.lIl- much wider renewable energy choices have increased the availability of renewable .lIlI " energy options. Hydro and solar heating have proved successful in Samoa over the 1.
"f last 20 years thus should be promoted greatly Recent studies tentatively conclude "f
that other RE sources such as solar "f power, wind, biogas, geothermal "f "f and wave to a lesser extent hold "f
.lIl- potential for future RE .lIlI " development. Launching a solar I "
"f power project on Apolima Island "f
confirms potential of this source. Figure 10: Solar water heaters are widely
• The abundance of biomass due to used in hotels and private homes and other I
f' favourable tropical environment small businesses f'-
could always provide a stable RE source especially for domestic household energy needs. Wind speed is being monitored .lIl- "f at different identified sites and results of these data collection will determine how wind energy can be developed as an I '
'f' alternative source to meet our energy needs. "
"f The Electric Power Corporation has also been exploring the prospects of supplementing conventional diesel with coconut "f
oil for its diesel generators. A study in 2003 showed that Samoa having coconuts in abundance and the continuous increase "f in the price of diesel fuel made this project more attractive and made it more viable to use coconut oil as a substitute to "f "f diesel fuel. However, there are high costs associated with extracting coconut oil. "f
.lIl- Foreign exchange savings, potential widespread benefits for the rural households as .lllt.. well as environmental benefits in burning coconut oil compared to diesel were also ' "" "f other factors considered in the study. "f
.lIl- One of the aims in developing RE is to reduce Samoa's high and increasing .lIldependency on fossil fuel primarily for power generation and in transportation.
I ' Reducing this involves a combination of energy demand side management and I '
.lIl- promoting renewable energy. To this extent public awareness must be conducted to .lIlpromote energy efficiency, conservation and highlighting the costs and benefits of
I " Renewable Energy. The public must also be well informed of RE technologies which I '
..,. Figure II: One way to manage solid are enVironmentally friendlyJ safe and applicable to their respective needs and how
. ... waste is Co recycle them through a bio- to use energy more efficiently to gain more energy savings. Partnership with . ...
digester to produce a renewable communities and all energy stakeholders must be strengthen in order to develop RE 4:- J energy source known as biogas. J 
lIl- activities and development partners assistance will be encouraged for these lIl-.lIlPacific Islands Renewable Energy Project(PIREP) coordinated by SPREP; Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Program .lIl
I ' (REEP) by Asian Development Bank (ADB), Promotion of Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency and Greenhouse Gas I '
1'" Abatement (PREGA), co-financed by the ADB and the Government of Netherlands and Regional Energy Program on Poverty 1'"
1'" Reduction (REP-POR) financed by United Nations Development Programme. 1'"
.lIl- These regional programs associated with national level activities further indicate Samoa's willingness to explore and .lIlI ' consolidate future opportunities in the area of renewable energy. Without a doubt, renewable energy will become more I '
1'" critical in the future. The Research Development Institute of Samoa (RDIS) will need to capitalise on renewable energy 1'"
.lIl- research findings of these various donor funded projects so that they could be transformed and developed into viable RE .lIlI ' projects. Clean Development Mechanisms (CDM) component should also be considered with regards to greenhouse gas I '
1'" emissions. In saying that, existing RE projects such as hydropower power plants should be upgraded as well developing 1'"
.lIl- potential hydro power plants with minimal impact on the environment. Renewable energy should also be explored fully in .lIlI ' the areas of transportation especially land transport. I '
1'" 1'"
1'" 1'"
1'" STRATEGIES: 1'"
1. Promote sustainable use of indigenous energy resources and renewable energy technologies.
2. Promote partnerships with communities and all energy stakeholders especially potential development partners in the
I . development of renewable energy programmes in Samoa; I .
t' 3. Explore training opportunities to build up capacity in Renewable Energy Technologies; t'
t' 4. Encourage the use of renewable energy research findings of the Research and Development Institute of Samoa on a ;yr
commercial basis. t'
1'" 5. Enhance public knowledge and understanding on Renewable Energy; its Costs and Benefits. f"
1'" 1'"
1'" 1'"
1'" 1'"
1'" 1'"
1'" 1'"
1'" 1'"jff, , ffy 
; Electricity is a secondary energy source generated from primary sources of KEY ISSUES ;
energy such as petroleum, hydro, solar energy and other natural sources. ./ Management Efficiency, Quality,
Currently around 40% to 50% of totaL electricity production is generated from Production, Transmission and f'-
hydro and the rest is fossil fuet. However this percentage varies accordingly Distribution strengthen;
I " during the wet and dry seasons. About 98% ./ Appropriate tariff structure indexed to I "
of the whole population have been input costs reflected; f'
electrified'. The 2001 Population Census , Electric Power Corporation's Act & other
identified that 93% of all households used related legislations strengthen and f' electricity for lighting compared to only 38% enforced;
,l1l, in 1981. This illustrates the increasing ,l1l,
, ... coverage and demand for electricity as well '" Partnership with the private sector and ' "" the community and all stakeholders
as preference for electricity against strengthen; .... , ... traditional sources. The EPC seeks , -.
alternative energy to electrify the remaining ., Viability of potential renewable energy
residents who are not connected to the grid. technologies for electricity generation
assessed; Viability of potential renewable energy
technologies for electricity generation needs ./ Demand Side Management for increased f'
to be assessed to choose the best option for efficiency examined ....
I " these households and for future I "
-'F development of electricity for Samoa. Mini hydro run of river schemes are still a considered option but feasibility studies of the "
identified areas are to be conducted to confirm its viability. A major run of river hydro project to be financed through ADB was .-..
I " proposed for Savaii but is yet to be confirmed. Solar power has just been launched in early February 2007 for Apolima Island to I "
't' meet electricity needs of Apolima residents. 't' .-.. Electricity generation, transmission and distribution are exclusively under the authority of the Electric Power Corporation .-..
I " through the administration of the EPC Act 1980. Partnership with the private sector, the community and all stakeholders is I "
;teo encouraged and strengthened to allow private sector involvement in power production. The EPe Act needs to be reviewed to .-..
reflect the noted update trends with provisions for private sector involvement and an appropriate tariff structure. Tariff
• adjustments will be implemented to encourage imports of more efficient electrical equipment and appliances. . -.y p g g pg y y 
electricity service for all customers. Demand Side Management for increased efficiency need aLso examined. Co-ordination and
collaboration between key stakeholders will also be enhanced through continuous consultations.
f' Generation of electricity using renewable energy sources will be heavily promoted as alternatives in light of the increasing price 'f' 't' of imported fuel and its impact on foreign reserves and the environment. To this effect, f-'
,1ll, electricity generated from solar energy is being piloted by the Electric Power Corporation ,1ll,
I " and results of this project will be crucial to the long term developments in electricity. The I "
f' use of coconut oil for electricity generation will be developed and generators will be t' -. upgraded to ensure an efficient level of electricity production is maintained. Efforts will -.
• also be geared towards minimising transmission losses. Instruments related to the provision . ...
of power in the Public Bodies (Transparency and Accountability) Act 20D1 must be adhered t' to for any new development.
.,.. Public Awareness programs need to be conducted on energy efficient and conservation,
appliance energy consumption ratings, promoting energy audits as well as illustrating ways •
• . to minimise electricity usage thus promote energy savings through different options Figure 13: The viability of the use of . ...
available. These efforts will culminate in greater consumer awareness on cost saving coconut oil for electricity generation to supplement for diesel will be
measures in terms of household and business kilowatts usage or demand side management. explored and assessed.
STRATEGIES:
t' 1. Strengthen management efficiency, quality, production, transmission and distribution to ensure reliable and affordable 'f- supply and safe distribution of electricity to all consumers; t'
t' 2. Set an appropriate tariff structure;
3. Review the EPC Act to allow private sector involvement in power production. ! 4. Strengthen partnership between EPC and the private sector and all relevant stakeholders including community on electricity ! • data and relevant projects. • ...
5. Promote electricity generation from proven renewable energy technologies (hydro, wind, solar, biomass, geothermal, etc) t'
and ensure that environment regulations are adhered to;
6. Promote implementation of demand~side-management strategies for increased efficiency for aU consumers. t'jf, fffpp
The rationalisation of supply and distribution of petroleum products which was KEY ISSUES
initiated in the early 1990s and came into effect in 1998 has resulted in the ./ Rationalisation of Supply,
I ' government acquiring all storage facilities for petroleum products. A tendering Distribution and Pricing System I '
process is carried out every 5 years to appoint an operator for the facilities to be of petroleum products; 1tt
responsible for the supply and distribution of ./ Improved Product Quality and
j '" petroleum products in accordance with the Storage Facilities; •
Petroleum Act 1984 and petroleum standards and ./ Enhanced legislation and
regulations. Wider invitation for greater enforcement; ./ Alternative fuel sources
participation from potential suppliers in the region examined for reduced emISSion -f' is anticipated. However, since this rationalisation and dependency on fossil fuel
.. exercise has resulted in a substantial reduction in ./ Enhanced public awareness on ;&:.
, ... petroleum prices making Samoa one of countries in the environmental impacts of •
the region with the lowest fuel prices. Fuel prices fossil fuel
are calculated and released on a monthly basis
1" based on fluctuation in international market fuel prices and the set costs such as supply I "
and distribution including transportation costs as stipulated in the agreed price template
during the tendering process. Further refinement is needed in the administration areas to
. ... ensure the efficiency and effectiveness in monitoring, management and assessment of •
;:t:. Figure 14: Safety standards and petroleum related matters such as pricing, security of supply, tendering process, quality • conditions of petrol service •
;:t:. stations need to bc maintained for and standards.
• sustainability of energy supply Samoa is highly dependent on imported petroleum for . .. ;:t:. and services • transportation and electricity generation. Samoa's energy
supply is dominated by petroleum products meeting over 60% of energy demand. Samoa
imports six petroleum products, namely unleaded petrol (ULP), diesel (ADO), domestic
I ' kerosene (DPK), jet fuel, engine oil and LPG. Petroleum Imports have increased over the I '
~~
The increasing number of vehicles in the country and increasing demand for electricity
contribute to the overall increasing demand for fossil fuel. Thus add to the potential negative
I " environmental impact of waste oil, petroleum by'products and Greenhouse Gases. In addition, I '
thlf fl d tl ltid tildit llibld id 
¥ ¥ I ' handling and storage of petroleum products are also used to ensure that the supplier I '
is safely and reliably supplying and distributing petroleum products to different
.,.,.. • destinations including all service stations in the country and storage facilities are well .,.,..
, ... maintained to avoid major destruction of the environment. However, enforcement of , ...
this Act and related legislations is required to ensure that these products are handled
with consciousness of a clean and safety environment. A host of human resource, .-.
I ' technological and legislation needs will be addressed to ensure safety environmental I '
compatibility including the disposal of waste oil and the merits of using alternative
fuelrou~es.
Above all, the public should be well informed of the government initiatives on the Figure 15: Petroleum storage facilities
must adhere to national and petroleum sector especially the potential negative impacts of fossil fuel on the
international safety and quality environment and the move to Renewable Energy. The public must be aware that t'
slandards. according to research, fossil fuel will be exhausted soon and people will have no .,.,..
choice but to switch back to using indigenous or renewable energy sources. People I '
nowadays are so used to the easy living of switch on and off with fossil fuel as their major source of energy, that they also
.,.,.. be informed of the costs and benefits of bio-fuel and other alternative or Renewable sources of energy to substitute for .,.,..
I ' fossil fuel in order to prepare themselves for change in the near future. I '
STRATEGIES:
... 1. Ensure that the Petroleum Act is enforced to govern supply, use, storage, distribution and disposal of fossil fuel and its by- .. . ... products. , -.
t' 2. Encourage competition in the supply and distribution of fuel and ensure that products quality and storage facilities meet
the required minimum national and international standards
1t 3. Promote the use of bio-fuels and other alternative energy sources to reduce dependency and emission on fossil fuel.
4. Enhance public knowledge and understanding on efficient use and envlronmental impacts of fossil fuel and the move to
I ' Renewable Energy. 1-'.lII:- Transportation is vital to the social and economic development of Samoa. KEY ISSUES: .lII:- • . Development in the transportation sector has direct links to the advancements ., Energy efficient transportation; . -
in other sectors of the economy. It " High demand for fuel and traffic .,.. 1- bl d congestion reduced; I fr ena es the movement of goods an ./ Fossil fuel subsUtute promoted; fr
services both domestically and abroad ./ Enhanced legislations and fr and increases access for non·urban regulations fr
dwellers to 3marketsJ employment ./ Data collection and coordination
• opportunities and services such as strengthen: . ... fr education and health. While it is ./ Storing and refueling safety fr .,.. important to develop the transport regulations enforced; ;l:-
I sector together with other . utilities, " Environmental and social impacts of . '" fossil fuel reduced; .,.
1- they are generally very costly projects ., Public awareness strengthen . -
.,. to implement and maintain. However, 4:-
1- there are maJ'or benefits in having an effective and energy efficient transportation 1- ... figure 16: [PC's bio-fuel experience is one ... • "" way of promoting efficiency in sector which flows into other sectors of the economy. A better planned and • '
.,. transportation and environmentally sound managed public transportation network will significantly improve efficiency in the 4:-
. ' energy SOUl"«. transport sector. j '
! The transport sector together with electricity consumed a major share of fossil fuel !
1- used in Samoa. Unlike electricity, almost all of the energy consumption in the . -
.lII:- transport sector is sourced from fossil fuel. In 2002, the transport sector consumed .lII:-
over 75% of total fossil fuel and is responsible for a substantial portion of . -
. - greenhouse gas emissions and air pollutants. By 2005, the transport sector 1'"
.lII:- accounted for over 80% of total fossil fuel consumption. The increasing number of .lII:-
, - imported cars in the 1990s accounted for most of the increasing demand for fossil 1.
1'" fuel. To assist in easing these pressures as well as promoting efficient vehicles, 1'"
.lII:- restrictions were imposed on vehicle importations based on model year. To further .lII:-
. - promote efficient vehicles, engine capacity is used both in determining if an import . -
excise tax is charged as well in calculating vehicle registration fees. For instance, Figure 17: Clean energy sources are .,.
h· I b 2000' . d d promoted to reduce the social and . "" .,. ve lC es a ove cc engmes are reqUlre to pay an excise tax an car j "" environmental impacts due to greenhouse . "" registration fees are levied against engine capacity. These measures have PlI!! emissions. 1'"
f')'f'r .., wider RE usage in the sector. The viability of using coconut oil to supplement fossil fuel needs be explored especially with ..,
I ' the abundance of coconuts available in Samoa. The Electric Power Corporation is currently piloting running two (2) of their I '
automotive diesel engines cars on coconut oil. The results from this pilot project should form the basis together with
international experience in developing coconut oil as a fossil fuel supplement.
.., Walking and cycling have health benefits as well as reducing the usage of vehicles and fossil fuel. Appropriate measures to ..,
" reduce energy by-products detrimental to the environment need to be developed. These include setting appropriate I '
emission levels especially on heavy diesel engines. Despite these challenges, the transport sector has become a critical
.., part of the national economy, underpinning a myriad of other industries and reflecting directly upon the value of everyday ..,
, ' activity in terms of time and access. The relationship between transport and the environment forms the bulk of the I '
transport sector's concerns. It calls for a review of the national laws. rules and regulations to reflect upon such issues as 1'- .., the protection of the atmosphere and energy efficiency. Petroleum safety standards and regulations must be adhered to ..,
, ' with regards to storage and refuelling of all transport modes. Development of alternative and sustainable modes of I '
transport and upgrading vehicles for curbing emissions is encouraged. Emphasis on disseminating information related to air
.., pollution and promoting public awareness of the impact of transport on the environment through the media is also
" encouraged. Better coordination of transport data collection will contribute greatly to the public awareness and improve
energy demand and supply information for dissemination.
STRATEGIES:
; 1. Regulate the importation and use of environmentally friendly and energy efficient vessels and motor vehicles and aircrafts; ;
"f' 2. Promote fuel efficiency in land and sea transport and ensure systems are reliable. efficient and affordable;
fi 3. Promote the use of bio-fuel as a substitute for imported fossil fuels to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and social impacts from
fossil fuel; . ...
4. Strengthen coordination between relevant ministries and transport stakeholders in data collection and relevant projects;
ft 5. Promote through public awareness programs efficient use of transport and encourage the use of public transport;
; 6. Enforce national and international safety regulation when storing and refuelling land, sea and air transport. ;