File Name: YEM-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Yemen
Country Code: YEM
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August to 1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2024
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
5 July 2022
Original: English
2210513X (E) 220722
Second regular session 2022
29 August to 1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Yemen (2023-2024)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 5
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
 Annex
Results and resources framework for Yemen (2023-2024)………………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework
1. Yemen is a low-income country and the poorest in the Middle East and North Africa 
regions, with a population of approximately 30.8 million people, 51.1 per cent of whom are 
female.
1 Around 62 per cent of the population live in rural areas; approximately 38 per cent of 
Yemenis are under 15 years of age 2and 63 per cent are under 243. The Human Development 
Index of Yemen in 2019 was 0.470, putting the country in the low human development category
and positioning it 179th out of 189 countries and territories.4 Yemen ranks 155th of 
156 countries in the Global Gender Gap Index, 2021, of the World Economic Forum,
representing huge gender disparities. Yemeni women remain significantly underrepresented in 
public and elected office, holding only 4.1 per cent of managerial and decision-making 
positions.
2. When conflict that broke out in September 2014 with the Houthi takeover of Sana’a, the 
Security Council established a special political mission for Yemen known as the Office of the 
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen.
5 The mission focuses on supporting a 
peaceful political transition in accordance with the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the 
outcomes of the national dialogue, and Security Council resolutions. In January 2019, the 
Secretary-General established a second special political mission – the United Nations Mission 
to support implementation of the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) – Stockholm – on the City 
of Hodeidah and Ports of Hodeidah, Salif, and Ras Issa.
3. Following a two-month truce agreed to in April 2022,
6 President Hadi ceded power to the
new Presidential Leadership Council, raising hopes for a future peace agreement, recovery and 
sustainable development interventions. The governance system remains fragmented, with 
fraught central-subnational relationships and a proliferation of ad hoc arrangements at the 
subnational level. The Government of Yemen is based in the temporary capital, Aden, 
controlling large areas of the county. The de facto authorities in Sana’a remain in control of 
much of the population in the northern parts of the country.
4. Yemen is suffering one of the largest humanitarian and development crises in the world. 
The war directly caused the death of over 21,000 people, and indirectly, over 377,000 people.
7
About 80 per cent of the population need humanitarian assistance. Over 4.3 million people have 
been displaced,
8 more than 70 per cent of them women and children.9 Livelihoods of over 
54 per cent of the population were eroded, the social fabric shredded, and population and 
institutional resilience weakened.
10 Critical infrastructure – water and sanitation, education, 
health, telecommunications and transportation – was damaged or destroyed, adversely affecting 
public service delivery. UNDP estimates that, due to the damaged infrastructure and poor 
capacity at the main seaports, shipping, insurance (including high war-risk premiums) and 
demurrage costs associated with imported food comprise 50 per cent of its cost. 
5. The United Nations common country analysis notes that Yemen was behind in achieving 
the Sustainable Development Goals even prior to the conflict in 2014. Experts estimate that 
human development has been set back 21 years, and if the conflict persists through 2030, 
development will be set back nearly four decades. The prolonged conflict, government 
1 https://www.worldometers.info/world-population/yemen-population/ (accessed on 29 March 2022)
2 United Nations Data – Yemen country profile (http://data.un.org/en/iso/ye.html)
3
arabdevelopmentportal.com. If provided with the right incentives and opportunities, the ‘youth bulge’ offers significant potential for development.
4 Human Development Report 2020
5 Security Council resolution 2216
6 https://osesgy.unmissions.org/press-statement-un-special-envoy-yemen-hans-grundberg-two-month-truce
7 Draft Humanitarian Needs Overview 2022
8 Humanitarian Needs Overview 2022 and Humanitarian Response Plan 2022, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
9 https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/Yemen_HNO_2021_Final.pdf
10 UNDP country strategy note (2021-2024)fragmentation, lack of preventive and restorative planning and implementation, and constrained 
resources, impede humanitarian development and peace efforts from taking root. 
6. The economy has shrunk by half since 2014, with over 80 per cent of the population living 
below the poverty line. Commodity prices continue to rise – especially in the south – as the 
Yemeni rial depreciates – an unfavourable situation for a country importing 90 per cent of its 
basic needs. Sources of foreign currency such as remittances, oil exports and bilateral funding 
streams remain suppressed.
11 The fragmented government institutions and competing 
monetary, fiscal, and economic policies of the parties to the conflict have eroded citizens’ trust 
in national institutions. The country has acute food insecurity verging on famine. The Integrated 
Food Security Phase Classification analysis projected that in 2022, over 19 million people 
would need food assistance and 161,000 would face extreme hunger. The main driver of food 
insecurity is unaffordability, emanating from increased food prices amidst reduced incomes and
livelihood opportunities. The COVID-19 pandemic has added layers of vulnerability for women 
and girls and exacerbated gender inequalities, increasing the burden of care work and job 
losses12 and exacerbating gender-based violence, including child and early marriage.
13
7. Temperatures have risen faster than the global average over the last three decades.
14 The 
country ranks 172nd out of 181 countries in the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Initiative index, 
indicating high vulnerability and low levels of readiness to adapt to climate change.
15 Yemen 
is one of the world’s most water-stressed countries, with extreme floods and droughts. Experts 
warn that Sana’a may be the first capital in the world to run out of water.
16 Desert locusts have 
destroyed crops in key agricultural areas, while floods have worsened the condition of roads,
bridges, and sewage systems.
8. Yemen is one of the world’s most energy insecure countries. Less than 10 per cent of the 
population have access to electricity, and most of those lacking it are women, who have fewer 
options to access or acquire sources of power.
17 This has led to the closure of schools and health 
centres. Yet the country has vast untapped potential for on- and off-grid renewable energy 
sources – solar, wind, and geothermal. With more than 2,500 kilometres of coastline and rich 
fishing grounds offshore, the fisheries sector holds untapped promise in contributing to the 
national economy. Social norms have limited the potential of women in this sector.
9. Throughout much of the country – particularly in the west, where most of the people reside
– the conflict has left widespread unexploded ordnance contamination. A potential 
environmental and humanitarian disaster looms on the Red Sea coast should there be an oil spill
from, or explosion of the floating storage and offloading tanker Safer, moored off the coast of 
Yemen and holding about 1.15 million barrels of oil. Coastal communities in Yemen and 
neighbouring countries, the fishing industry, and operations of the Hodeidah port, would be 
severely affected. 
10. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, to which UNDP 
will contribute, places people at the centre of humanitarian, development and peace efforts, 
especially those at highest risk of being left behind due to the impact of conflict. They include 
4.3 million internally displaced persons, 73 per cent of whom are women and girls experiencing 
high rates of poverty and exclusion from social and economic empowerment; children, who 
constitute 60 per cent of war casualties; and youth, over 2 million of whom are out of school, 
lack economic opportunities and are forced into negative mechanisms; 278,000 refugees, 
asylum seekers and migrants, excluded from mainstream economic activities and basic 
11 Ibid.
12 https://sanaacenter.org/publications/main-publications/14703
13 https://www.unicef.org/mena/media/11956/file/Child%20Marriage%20in%20the%20context%20of%20COVID-19 
%20MENA%20Regional%20Analysis_High%20Res%20(1).pdf.
14 RCCC-ICRC-Country-profiles-Yemen.pdf
15 https://gain-new.crc.nd.edu/country/yemen (accessed 30 March 2022)
16 https://www.american.edu/cas/economics/ejournal/upload/glass_accessible.pdf
17 https://blogs
worldbankorg/energy/promoting-financial-inclusion-and-access-solar-energy-among-women-yemenfacilities; 4.5 million persons with disabilities; and minorities (referred to as Muhamasheen), 
who represent 10 per cent of the population and may face stigma, abuse and exclusion from 
education, social protection and employment. 
11. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework pursues four 
outcomes through four priorities that align with those of the Sustainable Development Goals 
(‘planet, peace, prosperity, and people’) to improve lives and build resilience that is equitable, 
inclusive, people-centred, gender-responsive and human rights-based:
(a) Planet: increasing food security, creating livelihood options and jobs;
(b) Peace: Preserving inclusive, effective, and efficient national and local development 
and strengthening systems;
(c) Prosperity: Driving inclusive economic structural transformation; and
(d) People: Building social services, social protection, and inclusion for all.
12. The Framework focuses on operationalizing the humanitarian, development and peace
nexus to enable human development. UNDP will support the United Nations system in 
achieving the priorities of the Framework through its integrator role, using a two-pronged 
approach centred on building the resilience of people and institutions. These two integrated 
and mutually reinforcing prongs have been identified based on evaluative feedback on UNDP 
experiences in Yemen;
18 the efficacy of coherent and concurrent efforts across humanitarian 
and development domains in reducing vulnerabilities, enabling transitioning to recovery and 
development;
19 and the realization that humanitarian aid alone is not sufficient to address the 
increasing vulnerability of Yemenis, driven by the conflict and exacerbated by development 
and governance deficits.
20
13. The independent country programme evaluation noted that the programme grew six-fold 
since 2016,21 largely due to the ability of UNDP to identify and link immediate humanitarian 
assistance with medium- to longer-term development and peacebuilding interventions, 
increasing resilience, dignity, self-sufficiency, and autonomy. UNDP operationalizes the 
humanitarian, development and peace nexus by: bridging humanitarian action with 
stabilization, recovery, and peacebuilding programming; putting subnational actors in the lead 
at early programme stages; contributing to local peace agreements brokered by the Office of 
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen and UNMHA; supporting local partners 
and institutions to plan and implement area-based programmes; investing in local conflict and 
political economy analysis and integrating conflict sensitivity into all such interventions and 
processes; integrating medium- to longer-term gender equality and women’s empowerment,
and environmental and urbanization considerations of large populations of internally displaced 
persons, returnees, and refugees, into all area-based interventions and processes22.
14. UNDP has a track record and experience in building institutional and people’s resilience. 
Working through and building capacities of key national institutions, UNDP has, over the past 
five years provided over 1.5 million vulnerable, conflict and (since 2020) COVID-19-affected
Yemenis with emergency employment (12.5M workdays), livelihood, and income-earning
opportunities.
23 With funding from the World Bank, UNDP ensured over 759,000 vulnerable 
women and children benefitted from improved nutrition whilst over 5.7 million people accessed 
improved social services from newly constructed 903,000 cubic meters of water reservoirs, 
24,000 hectares of rehabilitated agricultural lands, 600km of repaired roads and 2,552 
rehabilitated classrooms.
18 Final Social Protection Lesson Learnt (2021)
19 Lessons learnt from the Yemen Emergency Crisis Response Project, 2020
20 UNDP Yemen country strategy note (2021 to 2024)
21 Independent country programme evaluation, 2018
22 Ibid.
23 Yemen Emergency Crisis Response programme
Enhanced Rural Resilience in Yemen programme (I and II)The country programme evaluation noted that the UNDP partnership with national institutions 
was essential for preserving national institutional capacity. In partnership with the World Bank, 
UNDP will deepen partnerships with national institutions to enhance their programme 
implementation capacities and participation in the recovery and reconstruction of Yemen, 
including through future loan implementation The UNDP comparative advantage stems from 
its strategic positioning and trust generated with authorities and the population during previous 
programming cycles, and ongoing investments in 322 districts to strengthen governance and 
service delivery-systems and implement confidence-building measures and initiatives 
stemming from peace negotiations led by the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. UNDP will use its integrator role to catalyse collaborations within the United Nations
and with the private sector, international finance institutions, donors, foundations, academia, 
national and subnational institutions, and civil society in implementing the humanitarian, 
development and peace nexus through a joint approach that draws on the strengths of the 
different partners; policy and economic analysis; and UNDP thought leadership, comparative 
advantages and convening power.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
15. The UNDP theory of change mirrors that of the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework, driven by the expectation that by 2024, all people of all ages in Yemen 
affected by conflict, forced displacement and poverty in all its dimensions, will experience a 
change in their quality of life. The Framework identifies four priority areas; increase food 
security and nutrition, sustainable and resilient livelihoods and environmental stability; 
improve rights-based good governance, inclusive, gender-sensitive public services and the rule 
of law; increase income security and decent work for women, youth and vulnerable populations; 
and strengthen social protection and basic service delivery focused on support to marginalized 
groups, and women and youth leadership in decision-making processes.
16. The overarching theory of change of the country programme is: If food security and 
green, inclusive economic recovery and development are boosted, and if national and 
subnational governance structures are strengthened and preserved, and if confidence-building 
measures and national and local peace processes are supported; then Yemenis will experience 
better, equal and inclusive access to nutritious food, sustainable and resilient livelihoods,
environmental stability and improved rights-based good governance, effective people-centred, 
equitable and inclusive gender- and age-responsive public services and rule of law, and 
confidence in the peace processes will be enhanced, laying the ground for sustainable peace.
17. To achieve the Framework priorities, UNDP will apply a holistic, conflict-sensitive,
gender-responsive and evidence-based development approach derived from its unique mandate, 
comparative advantage, and experience across the four priority areas. Fifteen per cent of the 
programme budget will be dedicated to gender results. As recommended by the independent 
country programme evaluation, UNDP developed an interim programme that guided the 
country programme from July 2019.. The interim programme’s achievements,
24 decentralized 
project evaluations findings and lessons learned 25 and studies26 informed the design of the new 
programme. The UNDP programme will uphold the pledges to ‘leave no one behind’ and ‘do 
no harm’, underpinned by the key programming principles: human rights, gender equality and 
women’s empowerment; sustainability and resilience; and accountability. The programme will 
strengthen South-South cooperation to tap into lessons and best practices from countries that 
recovered from civil unrest and prolonged conflict.
24 Corporate results reports, including the results-oriented annual reports 2019-2021
25 Final project evaluation of the rule of law, water, sanitation and hygiene, social protection and mine action projects; lessons learned studies for the 
Yemen Emergency Crisis Response programme and social protection projects
26 Yemen Emergency Crisis Response programme and social protection projects 18. The UNDP theory of change for programme priority one is: if macro-economic stability is 
enhanced, the cost of food is reduced, social protection systems are improved, value chains are 
diversified; and employment opportunities for vulnerable population groups are expanded, and
if natural resources are managed sustainably, then food security and green, inclusive economic 
recovery and development will be boosted. This programme area addresses three Framework 
priorities: (a) increasing food security, creating livelihoods options and jobs;27 (b) driving 
inclusive economic structural transformation; and (c) building social services, social 
protection and inclusion for all. 
19. In collaboration with the World Bank, Japan, the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and 
Relief Centre, other donors, and local institutions, UNDP will provide technical support to 
enhance the capacity of the Central Bank to restore trust and support the implementation of 
sound monetary and fiscal policies to stabilize the exchange rate and curb inflation; and to 
the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation for improved fiscal policy formulation 
and implementation. UNDP will improve the efficiencies of the Yemeni seaport; once
rehabilitated, the importation costs of food could decrease from 50 per cent to 10 per cent, 
translating into reduced food prices. 
20. In partnership with and funded by the World Bank, the European Union, Japan, the King 
Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 
and other partners, UNDP will enhance social protection and safety nets to improve people’s 
capacity to deal with shocks and stressors; scale up climate-resilient livelihoods and revive
small businesses; boost the purchasing power and economic self-reliance of vulnerable 
households by providing access to gender-appropriate employment and income opportunities
that take into consideration women’s different vulnerabilities; and enhance equal access to 
productive community assets and facilities. Working with micro-finance institutions and banks, 
UNDP will promote value-chain development and access to innovative financial services
and products for entrepreneurs, particularly women entrepreneurs. UNDP will partner with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food Programme to implement a 
comprehensive food security improvement programme that will boost climate-smart local 
agricultural production and build a diversified export of premium crops such as coffee. 
21. Given the potential of renewable energy sources, UNDP will partner with the private sector 
in extracting solar, wind, and geothermal energy resources and implementing waste-toenergy initiatives. Since water resources are increasingly scarce, resulting in competition over 
water resources, sustainable water management is an essential component of economic recovery 
and social cohesion. UNDP, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and partners will 
build the capacity of local institutions to undertake climate-resilient livelihoods and 
integrated water resource management, restoring and improving access to water.
22. The theory of change for programme priority area two is: if subnational governance 
institutions, civil society and the private sector are enabled to foster local governance, and if
rule-of-law institutions are capacitated to ensure the security, safety, and protection of Yemenis, 
then subnational governance structures will be preserved and strengthened to deliver on their 
respective mandates. This programme area addresses the Framework priority of preserving 
inclusive, effective and efficient national and local development, and systems 
strengthening. UNDP will partner with the European Union, Japan, the Netherlands, the 
Republic of Korea, other donors, local institutions and the private sector in this area. 
23. In partnership with the World Bank, the European Union, Sweden, Japan, and other donors,
UNDP will enhance the capacity of the private sector and civil society to engage with 
subnational authorities on local economic recovery and development; promote public-private 
partnership opportunities to improve community service delivery; and ensure that local 
economic recovery and development plans are inclusive, integrating, and addressing the needs
27 Also addressed by UNDP programme priority 3 – confidence-building measuresof women, youth, and those at the risk of being left furthest behind, including the 
Muhamasheen, people with disabilities, internally displaced persons, and returnees.
24. To facilitate the security, safety and protection of Yemenis, UNDP will collaborate with 
the Netherlands, the Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom, other donors, the Office of the 
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, UNICEF, UN-Women, the Office of the 
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime under the umbrella of the rule-of-law sector-wide approach to ensure that 
rural and urban areas receive support based on their needs and capacities. Support to the security 
sector – particularly the police, prisons, and coast guard – will focus on developing operational 
and planning capacities through human resources management, training, and gender-sensitive 
infrastructure development. In stable areas, and where politically feasible, UNDP will work on 
improving access to justice, particularly for women, by working with civil society on legal 
rights awareness-raising; establishing legal help desks in police stations and other sites easily 
accessible by vulnerable groups; training legal aid providers; paralegal outreach; and providing 
access to direct legal aid through bar associations, lawyers networks and civil rights civil society 
organizations. 
25. The high penetration of mobile phones provides opportunities to deploy mobile 
applications to disseminate and gather information on gender-based violence. UNDP will 
support institutional capacity-building for key government institutions and enhance digital
services and data management, exploring opportunities for South-South and triangular 
cooperation with countries in the region and beyond. 
26. The theory of change for programme priority area three is: if social cohesion, livelihoods, 
productive assets, and production levels of crisis-affected communities are restored, trust is
(re)built among conflicting parties; and if deep-rooted social divisions are addressed to 
overcome the threat of political tensions and social unrest, then confidence among in the peace 
processes is enhanced, laying the ground for sustainable peace. This programme area addresses 
the Framework priority of increasing food security, creating livelihoods options and jobs
and strengthening inclusive, effective and efficient national and local development and 
systems. 
27. In partnership with Canada, Denmark, the European Union, France, Germany, Italy, the 
Netherlands, Norway, the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, the Swiss 
Agency for Development and Cooperation, the United Kingdom, the Office of the Special 
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, UNMHA and the Resident Coordinator’s Office, 
UNDP will deliver on national and local peace process support through three main areas under 
the Peace Support Facility; support to track I peacebuilding initiatives, including confidencebuilding measures – rehabilitation and improved functionality and efficiency of seaports and 
airports; track II peacebuilding at the community level, with an emphasis on women, youth, 
and civil society, collaborating with academia and the private sector; and track III – special 
initiatives including Safer salvage operations to reduce environmental and social risks. UNDP 
will continue supporting the Government of Yemen to operationalize the National Action Plan
on women, peace, and security. 
28. In collaboration with FAO, UNDP will continue to address resources-based conflicts, 
especially concerning water. As prerequisites for the normalization of social and economic 
activity in the most conflict-affected areas of the country, UNDP, in partnership with Germany, 
Italy, Norway, the United States Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement 
Affairs, other donors, local institutions and non-governmental organizations will expand mine 
action operations to enable access to critical infrastructure and essential social and productive 
services and reduce injuries and fatalities from unexploded ordnance. 
29. The temporary truce and the formation of the Yemen Presidential Council provide a unique 
opportunity for UNDP to expand the implementation of confidence-building measures such astechnical support for reopening airports and seaports and to lead discourses on peacebuilding 
and transitional governance milestones as agreed by the parties to the conflict and the Office of 
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. 
III. Programme and risk management
30. The complex and dynamic context in Yemen calls for conflict-sensitive programming with
a continuous ‘finger-on-the-pulse’ of changes in the national and local context, allowing the 
programme to: change course in terms of scenarios, strategies, partnerships, and assumptions,
without losing track of delivering the desired longer-term results; and identify and address 
complex and multifaceted challenges and issues from a multidimensional perspective. UNDP 
Yemen calls this ‘adaptive management’, allowing regular programmatic and operational 
adaptations based on gender-, age-, and conflict-sensitive analysis and evidence gathered from 
internal and external learning loops to achieve and contribute to better development results. 
Together, they define adaptations to theories of change, portfolios, and pathways. UNDP will 
deploy tools for real-time and geospatial data and conflict analysis to gain in-depth 
understanding of the nature, geographic variation, and trajectory of existing or emerging 
opportunistic or disruptive factors. 
31. The protracted humanitarian situation, aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
effect of the war in Ukraine – especially on food security – may result in continued prioritization 
of humanitarian needs by funding partners, with minimal allocations to the economic and 
governance sectors, which could leave UNDP unable to mobilize sufficient financial support to 
deliver on its three programme areas. Increasing instabilities and conflicts globally – as in 
Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iraq, and Ukraine – will result in resources 
being channelled to other emergencies, and a dwindling resource base for Yemen. UNDP will 
explore new partnership opportunities with non-traditional donors: the Gulf Cooperation 
Council, the private sector, and foundations, and will pursue opportunities for South-South and 
triangular cooperation. If the resources do not materialize, or the context prevents programme 
implementation, the programme will scale down in accordance with UNDP procedures.
32. Given the high dependency of Yemen on food imports, food supply chain disruptions, and 
shortages, eventual price increases may undermine UNDP efforts to improve food security by 
improving food affordability. UNDP will collaborate with FAO and other stakeholders to boost 
local agricultural production.
33. A significant risk is the spread of armed conflict to an increasing number of areas, limiting 
or impeding access for UNDP and its partners. UNDP Yemen coordinates with the Office of 
the Special Envoy, humanitarian and United Nations country teams to address political risks
collectively. The decentralized structure of UNDP – main office in Sana’a and sub-offices in 
Aden (south) and Hodeidah (north) will facilitate business continuity in the event of programme 
disruption in Sana’a or any other region. Support to non-United Nations security forces will be 
informed by applying the human rights due diligence policy issued by the Secretary-General.
34. In terms of financial risk associated with the weak capacity of partners, UNDP will be 
guided by the Enterprise Risk Management Policy and the Harmonized Approach to Cash 
Transfer guidelines as a mitigation measure. UNDP operates a comprehensive results
monitoring system, including country office, project and independent (third-party) monitoring. 
UNDP will apply corporate social and environmental safeguards, accountability, early warning, 
and grievance-redress mechanisms to communities that could be negatively affected by UNDP 
actions following the Social and Environmental Standards Policy.
35. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional, and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the programme and operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework.
The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be replaced 
by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable a response to force majeure. The 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be coordinated with other United Nations
organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and 
development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
36. The country programme outcome areas and performance indicators are aligned with the 
UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, and the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework, 2022-2024. Due to the increasing demand for data and evidencebased analysis to complement decision-making processes, UNDP will use online beneficiary 
feedback mechanisms, real-time monitoring, reporting, and micro-narratives building on
traditional data collection methods. UNDP will engage third-party monitoring agencies to 
access hard-to-reach areas for UNDP personnel, due mainly to insecurity. Data generated by 
the country office will be gender-disaggregated and supplemented, to the extent possible, by 
available national qualitative and quantitative data. Routine monitoring across the outcome 
areas will be undertaken as part of the joint Framework workplan with stakeholders, led by 
results groups, with support from the country team’s monitoring and evaluation working group. 
The results groups, co-chaired by the respective United Nations organization outcome leads,
will meet on a quarterly basis, while the Resident Coordinator will chair the high-level annual 
review. 
37. Evaluation of projects will be executed as defined in the evaluation plan for the purposes 
of learning/knowledge management, adaptive programming, and quality assurance. These will 
include gender-responsive project, programme, and outcome level evaluations as agreed with 
development partners in cost-shared agreements. As part of United Nations Sustainable 
Cooperation Framework requirements, UNDP will participate in United Nations system-wide 
evaluations. To enable effective monitoring and evaluation, 5 per cent of the country 
programme budget will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation activities. Project quality 
assessments, including the use of the gender marker, will continue to use the corporate 
programming quality standards to review project performance and progress.
38. UNDP will continue to build the monitoring and evaluation capacities of its responsible 
parties and relevant government counterparts and departments. UNDP will provide support to 
the Ministries of Finance and Planning and International Cooperation, when the context 
permits, on (a) implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals monitoring and 
evaluation framework to track the progress being made towards achievement of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development; and (b) enhancing the capacities of the statistical office 
for data generation and analysis.
39. UNDP will use various communications strategies and tools to provide information about 
its results and to augment its advocacy efforts around key development issues. Traditional and 
social media platforms will be used to tailor communication products to specific audiences, and 
communications costs will be covered by programme and project budgets.Annex. Results and resources framework for Yemen (2023-2024)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Not applicable (N/A)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 1. By 2024, people in Yemen, especially women, adolescents and girls and those in 
the most vulnerable and marginalized communities benefit from better, equal and inclusive access to nutritious food, sustainable and resilient livelihoods, and environmental stability.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
Cooperation framework 
outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s)
Data source and 
frequency of data 
collection, and 
responsibilities
Indicative country programme outputs Major partners/partnerships
Frameworks
Estimated cost 
by outcome ($)
Indicator 1.1 Proportion of the 
population experiencing 
moderate to severe food 
insecurity (modified 
Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 2.1.2)
Baseline (2021):16.2 million
(54%)
Target (2024): 13 million
(43%)
Integrated Food 
Security Phase 
Classification 
reports
Output 1.1. Improved productive infrastructures and assets to increase food 
security, local economic recovery, and access to services28
Indicator 1.1.1 Number of people benefiting from increased access to 
community infrastructures 
Baseline (2022): 5,715,006; Female 2,743,203, Male 2,971,803)
Target (2024): 6,584,130; Female 2,962,858; Male 3,621,272
Data source: Programme reports; frequency: semi-annual 
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of people benefitting from immediate income 
opportunities 
 (a) Jobs created
Baseline (2022): 461,706; Female 92,341; Male 369,365 
Target (2024): 646,771; Female 129,354; Male 517,417
(b) Access to business opportunities
Baseline (2022): 6,901 Female: 3,243; Male: 3,658 
Target (2024): 16,322 Female: 6,991; Male: 9,331 
Data source: Programme reports; frequency: semi-annual 
Output 1.2. Increased access to renewable energy sources for vulnerable 
population groups
Indicator 1.2.1 Number of social facilities supported with renewable energy
Baseline (2022): Solar 593 
Target (2024): Solar 697
Data source: Project reports
Indicator 1.2.2 Number of people benefiting from access to clean energy. 
Baseline (2022): Female 585,000; Male 585,000
Target (2024): Female 685,000; Male 685,000
Data source: Project reports
-World Bank
-European Union
-Sweden
-Japan
-King Salman Humanitarian Aid 
and Relief Centre
-FAO
-WFP
-International Labour 
Organization 
-UNICEF
-Ministry of Planning and 
International Cooperation 
-Social Fund for Development
-Public Works Project 
-Small and Micro Enterprise 
Promotion Service 
Regular 
$2.9 million
Other 
$148.2 million
28 Public service systems that fill basic human needs
including drinking watersanitationhygieneenergymobilitywaste collectionhealth careeducation and information technologies (SDG 141)DP/DCP/YEM/3
Output 1.3. Natural resources management improved to enhance sustainable 
agricultural productivity and climate resilience
Indicator 1.3.1 Number of households directly benefiting from water resource 
management initiatives, disaggregated by sex of head of household.
Baseline (2022): 0; 0 Female 0; Male 0
Target (2024): 34,186 Female 8,826; Male 25,360
Data source: Programme reports; frequency: semi-annual
Indicator 1.3.2 Number of assessment studies on climate change impacts on 
Yemen natural resources and livelihoods base.
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2024): 1 
Data source: Assessment study delivered
Output 1.4. Yemeni women’s access to finance, cash transfers and business 
development in the fishery value chain improved.
Indicator 1.4.1 Number of women-owned businesses accessing financial and 
business development support.
Baseline (2021): Female 0
Target (2024): Female 420
Data source: programme reports
Indicator 1.4.2 Number of women supported with cash for nutrition or other 
social services
Baseline (2022): 275,197 
Target (2024): 345,397
Data source: programme reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: N/A
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 2. By 2024, people in Yemen, especially women, adolescents and girls and those in 
the most vulnerable and marginalized communities experience more rights-based good governance, comprised of effective people-centred, equitable and inclusive gender and ageresponsive improved public services, and rule of law.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. No one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
Indicator 2.1 Number of 
gender-responsive district 
capacity development plans 
implemented
Ministry of 
Education
Ministry of Legal 
Affairs,
Administrative data
Output 2.1. Local governance systems strengthened for the socio-economic 
opportunity and inclusive basic service delivery
Indicator 2.1.1 Number of subnational governments (at district level) with 
improved capacities to plan, budget, manage and monitor basic services
-European Union
-Sweden
-Japan
-Netherlands
-Republic of Korea
-UN-Habitat
Regular 
$3 million
Other 
$66 millionBaseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 40
Indicator 2.2 Number of 
districts with an increased
investment budget (actual) 
per capita
Baseline (2019): 0
Target (2024): 40
Investment funds 
channelled through
Local Resilience 
and Recovery Fund
Baseline (2021): 24
Target (2024): 40 
Data source: Strengthen Institutional and Economic Resilience project reports
Frequency: annual
Indicator 2.1.2 Number of new measures that improve agility and
responsiveness of local governance institutions for basic service delivery
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2024): 2
Data source: Rule of Law project reports; frequency: annual
Output 2.2. Women empowered to contribute to local decision-making.
Indicator 2.2.1 Proportion of women empowered to participate actively in 
local decision-making
Baseline (2021): 0%
Target (2024): 10%
Data source: Strengthen Institutional and Economic Resilience, Rule of Law 
project reports; frequency: annual 
Output 2.3. Capacities of justice and rule of law institutions strengthened to 
expand human rights, access to justice, safety, and security with a focus on 
women, girls and other marginalized groups
Indicator 2.3.1 Number of rule of law-related institutions rehabilitated and 
operationalized 
Baseline (2021):18
Target (2024): 25
Data source: Rule of Law project reports; frequency: annual
Indicator 2.3.2 Number of people who have access to justice, disaggregated 
by sex and marginalized groups.
Baseline (2021): 1,315,286; female 216,403; internally displaced persons 
(IDPs) 0; Persons living with disabilities 0
Target (2024): 1,500,000; female 300,000, IDPs 20,000, PLWD 5,000
Functions in line with provisions of the peace process 
Data source: Rule of Law project reports; frequency: annual
Output 2.4. Key governance institutions are enabled to perform core 
functions in line with provisions of the peace process 
Indicator 2.4.1 Extent to which governance institutions have requisite 
capacities to perform core functions. 
- Office of the Special Envoy of 
the Secretary-General for Yemen
-UN-Women
-UNICEF
-UNHCRDP/DCP/YEM/3
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2024): 2
 Scale: 1=limited capacity; 2=some capacity; 3=high capacity
Data source: Project reports; frequency: annual
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: N/A
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 3. By 2024, people in Yemen, especially women, adolescents, girls and those at risk 
of being left behind, become more resilient to economic shocks by increasing their income security and access to decent work.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3. Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
Indicator 3.1 Proportion of 
population in humanitarian 
need
Baseline (2021): 67%
Target (2024): 60%
Humanitarian 
Needs Overview 
Humanitarian 
Response Plan 
Frequency: annual
Output 3.1. Critical infrastructure/facility and restored to facilitate 
implementation of peace agreements and increase citizens’ confidence in the 
peace processes. 
Indicator 3.1.1 Number of critical infrastructure/facilities29 partially and fully 
restored30. 
Baseline (2022): partially restored 0; fully restored 0
Target (2024): partially restored 3; fully restored: 0
Partially (40-89%), fully (more than 90%)
Data source: Assessment report, project report; frequency: annual 
Indicator 3.1.2 Percentage increase of imported goods handled by all seaports 
in Yemen
Baseline (2022): 0%
Target (2024): 6%
Data source: Annual port reports; frequency: annual
Output 3.2. Capacities of communities, local institutions and civil societies 
enhanced to manage local conflicts and promote social cohesion
Indicator 3.2.1 Number of conflicts resolved through local institutions and/or 
civil societies such as water users’ associations
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2024): 20
Data source: Project reports, Frequency: annual
-Canada
-Denmark
-European
-France
-Germany
-Italy
-Netherlands
-Sweden
-Switzerland
-Norway
-United Kingdom
-Port authorities
Regular 
$2 million
Other 
$120 million 
29 Key targeted infrastructure/facilities are: one seaport, one airport and Safer tanker salvage operations.
30 Partially (40-89%), fully (more than 90%)Output 3.3. Capacities of national institutions improved to manage the mine 
action sector and improve community safety and protection from explosive 
ordnance
Indicator 3.3.1 Number of explosive remnants of war removed
Baseline (2021): 27,000
Target (2024): 167,000
Data source: Project reports, Frequency: annual
Indicator 3.3.2 Area cleared and free from the threat of explosive ordnance 
Baseline (2021): 1,600,000 m2
Target (2024): 8,600,000 m2
Data source: Project reports, Frequency: annual
Output 3.4. Capacity of women-led organizations, local non-governmental 
organizations and community-based organizations enhanced to promote and 
mainstream gender equality and the Women, Peace and Security agenda
Indicator 3.4.1 Number of initiatives that promote women’s participation in 
the local and national peace process
Baseline (2022): 0
Target (2024): 4
Data source: Project reports, Frequency: annual