File Name: ZAF-NEEP-2016-EN
Year: 2016
Country Name: South Africa
Country Code: ZAF
Category: NEEP
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2016
Start Year: 2016
End Year: 2021
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

TINA JOEMAT -PETTERSSON, MP
I, Tina Joemat -Pettersson, Minister of Energy, hereby publish the draft post -
2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy for public comments.
Interested persons and organisations are invited to submit, within 30 days,
written comments on the draft post -2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy
on any of the following:
Post: Director -General
Department of Energy
Private Bag X 96
Pretoria, 0001
For Attention: Xolile Mabusela
Energy, Department of/ Energie, Departement van
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
NOTICE 948 OF 2016 948 Draft Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy: For public comments 40515t1) energy
Department
Energy
OF SOUTH AFRICA
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy
1st DRAFT
September 2016
Draft Version 1.2Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1
i
Table of Contents
1. ENERGY EFFICIENCY POLICY IN SOUTH AFRICA 1
2. VISION AND MISSION 3
3. THE RESULTS FRAMEWORK 4
4. ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND SAVINGS POTENTIALS 5
4.1. SOUTH AFRICA’S ENERGY CONSUMPTION PROFILE 5
4.1.1. ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY ENERGY CARRIER 5
4.1.2. ENERGY CONSUMPTION BY SECTOR 6
4.1.3. ENERGY INTENSITY TRENDS 7
4.2. DEFINING ENERGY EFFICIENCY 8
4.3. THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY OPPORTUNITIES 8
4.4. ENERGY EFFICIENCY POTENTIAL IN THE SOUTH AFRICA 10
5. PATHWAY TO REALISING SOUTH AFRICA’S ENERGY EFFICIENT FUTURE 14
5.1. THE PUBLIC SECTOR 15
5.2. THE RESIDENTIAL SECTOR 19
5.3. THE COMMERCIAL SECTOR 23
5.4. THE INDUSTRY AND MINING SECTOR 25
5.5. THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR 28
5.6. THE TRANSPORT SECTOR 30
5.7. PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION 32
5.8. SECTOR-LEVEL AND ECONOMY-WIDE IMPACTS 33
6. THE ENABLING FRAMEWORK 35
6.1. ON-GOING STRATEGIC PLANNING 35
6.2. OVERCOMING MARKET BARRIERS 35
6.3. KNOWLEDGE SHARING, DATA COLLECTION AND PERFORMANCE MONITORING 36
6.4. MONITORING COMPLIANCE, ENFORCEMENT AND EVALUATING THE POLICY MEASURES 37
7. THE WAY FORWARD 38Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
ii
ABBREVIATIONS
AFASA African Farmers‟ Association of South Africa
CSIR Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
DEA Department of Environmental Affairs
DoE Department of Energy
DoHS Department of Human Settlements
DoT Department of Transport
DPW Department of Public Works
DST Department of Science and Technology
DTI Department of Trade and Industry
EEDSM Energy Efficiency Demand Side Management
EnMS Energy Management Systems
EPC Energy Performance Certificate
ESCO Energy Service Company
GHG Greenhouse Gas 
GJ Gigajoule
HVAC Heating, ventilation and air conditioning
IEA International Energy Agency
IEE Industrial Energy Efficiency
IEP Integrated Energy Plan
IFI International Financing Institution
IGCC Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution 
IPP Independent Power Producers
IRP Integrated Resource Plan
M&V Monitoring and Verification
MEPS Minimum Energy Performance Standard(s)
Mt Megatonne
MW Megawatt
NCPC National Cleaner Production Centre
NDP National Development Plan
NEES National Energy Efficiency Strategy
PJ Petajoule
PSEE Private Sector Energy Efficiency
REIPPP Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
iii
Programme
REITs Real Estate Investment Trusts 
SANS 204:2011 SANS 204 (2011) (English): Energy efficiency in buildings1
SANS 10400- XA SANS 10400-XA (2011) (English): The application of the 
National Building Regulations Part X: Environmental 
sustainability Part XA: Energy usage in buildings2
SANAS South African National Accreditation System
SAQA South African Qualifications Authority
TJ Terajoule
TWh Terawatt hour
WESSA Wildlife and Environment Society of South Africa
 
1 https://law.resource.org/pub/za/ibr/za.sans.204.2011.pdf
2 https://law.resource.org/pub/za/ibr/za.sans.10400.xa.2011.pdfIndustrial &
Mining Sector
Final demand
reduction of
15% by 2015
Transport Sector
Final demand
reduction of
9% by 2015
Reduction of
National Energy
Demand of
12% by 2015
Commercial &
Public Building Sector Final demand
reduction of
15% by 2015
Residential Building Sector
Final demand
reduction of
10% by 2015
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
1
1. Energy efficiency policy in South Africa
The Government of South Africa 
through the Department of Energy 
(DoE) released the first National 
Energy Efficiency Strategy (NEES) in 
2005. This strategy aimed to respond 
to the increasing demand for energy 
alongside a growing commitment to 
improving resource use and reducing 
South Africa‟s national environmental 
footprint. The NEES set an overall 
reduction target in energy intensity of 
12% by 2015, and sectoral energy 
intensity improvements as follows: 
industry and mining (15%), power 
generation (10%), transport (9%), 
commercial and public building 
sector (15%), and residential (15%). The NEES derived its mandate from the White 
Paper on Energy Policy (1998) and it was subsequently revised in 2011. A National 
Energy Efficiency Action Plan was developed in 2012 describing the implementation 
of the strategy.
The Energy Efficiency Target Monitoring System was established in 2014 to monitor 
the progress made towards meeting the original targets (based on a year 2000 
baseline). The results of the analysis, which relied to a large extent on existing data3
, 
confirmed that significant progress has been made between 2000 and 2012 in 
improving energy intensity, exceeding expectations for most sectors. The 
improvements in energy intensity reflect a combination of autonomous change, 
technological advancements, and deliberate interventions to improve energy 
efficiencies.
Table 1: Improvements in energy intensity (2000-2012) compared to the 2005 targets (DoE, 2015)
Sector 2015 target (based 
on 2000 baseline)
Performance to 2012
Economy-wide 12% 23.7%
Industry 15% 34.3%
Residential 10% 28.2%
Commercial & public 15% 0.3% (electricity only, 2003-13)
Transport 9% 14.1% (reduction in sector-wide energy 
intensity)
Power sector 15% 26% (estimated by Eskom)
 
3 It should be noted that there are some limitations to the quality and coverage of data that is available for the 
public, commercial, transport, and power sectors. The DoE was able to undertake primary data collection to 
support the analysis for the residential and industrial sectors.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
2
This post-2015 NEES aims to build on these achievements, stimulating further 
energy efficiency improvements through a combination of fiscal and financial 
incentives, a robust legal and regulatory framework, and enabling measures. The 
strategy has been framed to complement the policies and strategies of the 
Department of Environment Affairs (DEA), the Department of Public Works (DPW), 
the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Department of Trade and 
Industry (DTI), Department of Transport (DoT) and the National Treasury.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
3
2. Vision and mission
The Department of Energy’s Vision
Our vision is to promote energy efficiency as the ‘first fuel‟4 in driving balanced, 
socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable economic growth, boosting job 
creation and leading technological innovation across the region.
The Department of Energy’s Mission
Improving energy efficiency is a strategic priority in both the National Development 
Plan 2030 and South Africa‟s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) 
under the UN Framework on Climate Change. This post-2015 strategy considers the 
current economic and development context in South Africa, and aims to encourage 
continued growth by reducing energy inefficiency as a barrier to future progress.
The South African Government is committed to seizing the possibilities that energy 
efficiency represents in:
 improving energy security, reducing dependence on energy imports5 and 
improving reliability by freeing generation capacity to support future growth;
 optimising resource to safeguard environmental sustainability;
 improving competitiveness by supporting users to reduce their energy 
intensity but also to support South African industry and commerce in
exploiting the energy efficiency market opportunities within the region;
 stimulating inclusive economic growth by releasing generation capacity to 
all citizens of South Africa and developing the regulatory framework and 
incentive measures to make affordable, energy efficient technology widely 
available.
The Department of Energy undertakes to support businesses, households and 
government departments to take advantage of the energy efficiency opportunities by:
 facilitating the increased availability of affordable, good quality, energy 
efficient technologies on the local market;
 supporting job creation, in the implementation of energy efficiency measures 
and through the redeployment of wealth to other economic activities;
 supporting energy efficiency investments through the provision of fiscal and 
financial incentives that improve the business case and encouraging 
increased confidence in energy efficiency in the financial sector;
 promoting the sharing of knowledge and best practice across sectors, 
technologies, processes, and behaviours;
 fostering a vibrant and professional energy services sector that is self-
 
4 The “first fuel” concept is gaining increased credence worldwide. Energy efficiency is considered to be a hidden 
energy resource that should be fully exploited before considering other sources as it takes less time to 
implement, lasts longer and keeps producing without the negative effects of generation. (IEA. (2014), Capturing 
the Multiple Benefits of Energy Efficiency: A Guide to Quantifying the Value Added, IEA, Paris.) Energy efficiency 
measures are not only the fastest way to ensure the path towards a low-carbon transition, but also improve the 
economic output, productivity and energy security of South Africa. 
5 Although South Africa is a net exporter of energy, as of 2012 it depended on imports for about 85% of its total 
supply of oil and gas.To promote energy efficiency as the 'first fuel' in driving balanced, socially inclusive
and environmentally sustainable economic growth, boosting job creation and leading
technological innovation across the region
Expected 2030 impacts (reduction in final energy consumption) from 2015:
Economy -wide - 29%
Industry Sector - 15%
Public & commercial sector - 37%
Residential sector - 33%
Agriculture sector - 30%
T.,r. Public buildings
goal and target
(see Page 9) J
Municipal
services goal
and targets
(see Page 11)
Residential sector goal and
targets
(see Page 12)
Commercial buildings sector
goal and target
(see Page 15)
Industry sector
goal and targets
(see Page 17)
Agriculture
sector goal and
target
(see Page 20)
Transport
sector goal and
target
(see Page 22)
Production &
distribution
goal and targets
(see Page 24)
Public buildings measures Municipal services measures Residential sector measures Commercial buildings measuresIndustry sector measures Agriculture
sector measures Transport sector measures Production &
distribution measures
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
4
sustaining and can both drive and meet demand for the implementation of 
energy efficiency measures.
3. The results framework
The results framework (Figure 1) establishes a coherent logic between the policy 
measures, the sectoral impact, and the anticipated overall impact. This is important 
not only to facilitate the definition of a package of appropriate, relevant measures for 
each sector that will yield significant impact, but also to make simpler the 
measurement of the impact of the policy measures put in place. As illustrated below, 
the package of measures for each sector combined with the supporting measures 
are expected to realise sectoral goals and targets, which are linked to the projected 
overall impact of the specific measures. Improvements at a macro-economic level 
are subject to a significant number of factors external to the policy measures relating 
to energy efficiency and therefore, the sectoral targets will provide the performance 
assessment that will inform how effective the policy measures put in place affect 
implementation.
Annex 1 contains a detailed description of the results framework, including the actual
measures and the targets associated with each sector and level.
6
Figure 1: The post-2015 NEES results framework
 
6 At the highest level (impacts), the reduction in final energy consumption is targeted in terms of end use. This 
explains why there is no target for production and distribution of energy at this level. The targets for each sector 
are explained in more detail in sector-specific chapters and the results framework is described in Annex A.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
5
4. Energy efficiency and savings potentials
To promote a common understanding of energy efficiency in the South African 
context, the definition of energy efficiency, the benefits of and barriers to 
improvements, and potential energy savings opportunities that exist in South Africa 
are described below. 
4.1. South Africa’s energy consumption profile
4.1.1. Energy consumption by energy carrier
Between 2000 and 2012, a significant shift occurred in the relative roles played by different energy 
different energy carriers in South Africa’s total final energy consumption. In 2000, coal and electricity 
coal and electricity accounted for similar shares of total final consumption, with the share of petroleum 
share of petroleum products somewhat higher. By 2012, the consumption of electricity and especially 
electricity and especially petroleum products had increased significantly, while that of coal had declined. 
coal had declined. These trends are shown in 
Table 2 and Figure 2 below.
It is worth emphasising here that these figures represent total final energy 
consumption, rather than primary energy demand. They do not therefore include 
energy that is consumed or transformed in the energy conversion processes (for 
example, power generation and the synthesis of liquid fuels from coal). Although the 
final consumption of coal has fallen over the time period covered in this analysis, the 
large increases in the final consumption of electricity and petroleum products have 
largely been met through coal-based energy conversion processes. Hence the 
reduction in total final consumption of coal does not imply an overall reduction in the 
South African economy‟s dependence on coal.
Figure 2Fuel mix of final energy consumption for the South African economy – 2000 versus 2012
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
2000 2012
Total final energy consumption (PJ)
Coal
Electricity
Petroleum products
GasPost-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
6
Table 2 Composition of total final energy consumption (PJ) by energy carrier, 2000 and 2012
2000 2012
% change in 
consumption
Coal 655 (33%) 401 (22%) -24%
Petroleum products 731 (36%) 938 (42%) +28%
Gas 40 (2%) 99 (4%) +148%
Electricity 577 (29%) 698 (31%) +21%
TOTAL 2,003 2,236 +12%
Note that these figures include the portion of total final energy consumption that is 
not attributable to any sector (referred to in the Energy Balance Table as „Nonspecified‟), whereas this component has been excluded from the detailed analyses 
described below. Overall total figures may therefore not agree.
4.1.2. Energy consumption by sector
Three sectors denominate the total final energy consumption in South Africa: 
Industry & Mining, accounting for 35%; Transport, accounting for 29%; and 
Residential, accounting for 25%. The full sectoral breakdown of total final energy 
consumption, according to the 2012 Energy Balance Table, is shown in Figure 3
below. Note that the share of the residential sector is very strongly influenced by 
estimates of the total consumption of biomass in households. Although the sector 
shares in Figure 3 include the DoE‟s best estimate of biomass energy consumption, 
this quantity has been omitted from the detailed analyses described below. Overall 
total figures may therefore not agree. Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
7
Figure 3: Proportion of total final consumption per sector based on Energy Balance Tables (2012)
4.1.3. Energy intensity trends
As of 2012 (the most recent year for which aggregate data is currently available), the 
total final energy consumption of the South African economy stood at about 
2,108 PJ, an overall increase of 4.8% from its 2000 baseline of 2,011 PJ. Over the 
same period, the total GVA7 of South Africa‟s productive sectors increased by about 
44%, from about R1,798 billion up to R2,588 billion, while the number of households 
increased by about 42% from an estimated 10.3 million in 2000 up to 14.6 million in 
2012. Considering the productive sectors alone, energy intensity decreased from 
1.02 MJ/R in 2000 to 0.73 MJ/R in 2012, equivalent to an annual compounded 
reduction in energy intensity of about 2.7%.
Figure 4 below shows how energy intensity has changed in each of the main sectors. 
In order to make these trends easier to observe, this graph shows five-year rolling 
average to smooth out the wide fluctuations sometimes seen between consecutive 
years. In addition, the figures have been indexed to the base year of 2004. The 
graph indicates that the commercial & public sector saw a substantial increase in 
energy intensity to 2009, after which it has fallen back to close to its 2000 level. The 
energy intensity of the transport sector has changed relatively little over the 12-year 
analysis period, while that of the other three sectors has fallen by significant and 
similar amounts, with their average energy intensity over the five years to 2012 being 
approximately 20% lower than for the five years to 2004.
 
7 At constant 2010 prices
Industry Sector
35%
Transport Sector
29%
Agriculture
2%
Commerce and 
Public Services
7%
Residential
25%
Non-specified 
(Other)
2%
Proportion of total final energy consumption by economic sector Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
8
Figure 4Trends in sector energy intensity. For clarity, five-year rolling average figures are shown in order 
to smooth out sharp fluctuations. Figures are expressed as an index relative to the value for 2004
4.2. Defining energy efficiency
The most strictly „correct‟ definition of energy efficiency would be the ratio between 
the theoretical minimum energy requirement for performing task and the amount of 
energy actually used. However, this definition would be virtually impossible to apply 
on a large scale. Instead, energy efficiency is usually defined as the amount of useful 
output obtained divided by the energy used to produce that output. This is the 
reciprocal of a quantity that is generally referred to as „energy intensity‟ – the energy 
used per unit of output obtained.
However, this apparently straightforward definition begs the question of how output 
is to be quantified. Output can be measured either in physical units (tonnes of steel 
produced, square metres of office space heated, etc.) or in monetary terms (valueadded produced). For the purposes of this strategy, the use of the term „energy 
intensity‟ generally implies the use of monetary units for measuring output. Where 
output is quantified in physical units, the term „specific energy consumption‟ will be 
used. While a fall in energy intensity may signify an improvement in energy 
efficiency, it must be remembered that energy intensity can be affected by many 
factors other than changes in efficiency. Energy intensity is therefore only an 
imperfect proxy for „real‟ changes in energy efficiency.
4.3. The energy efficiency opportunities
Considering energy efficiency as the „first fuel‟ has direct effects on demand 
reduction, decreasing the costs of energy infrastructure expansion, and diminishing
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. However, the benefits of energy efficiency are 
far-reaching. The improved trade balances and employment creation that can be 
achieved through energy efficiencies boost macro-economic development. As 
illustrated in the figure below, the benefits also extend to social, environmental, and 
financial gains at an individual, community or society level. 
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Five-year rolling average energy intensity index
Agriculture, forestry and 
fishing
Industry & mining
Commercial and public
Transport
ResidentialAsset values Energy savings GHG
emissions
Resource management
pollution
Locala
Employment
Energy efficiency
improvement
101115 Macro- 1111111r 1 economic
impacts
Industrial ttproductivity
tion I .1 Health and well -being
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
9
The introduction of energy efficiency measures in the industrial and commercial 
sectors has a direct impact on company competitiveness, productivity and 
profitability. According to the IEA, the value of the improvements in productivity and 
product quality can be as much as 2.5 times the value of the energy savings (IEA, 
2011). 
South Africa‟s standing as a regional centre for technology innovation, manufacturing 
and the supply of goods presents a unique and exciting opportunity. As energy 
efficiency becomes increasingly important for surrounding countries some of which 
have or are developing their energy efficiency strategies, such as Botswana and 
Malawi, there may be opportunities to export goods and expertise, boosting regional 
trade and fundamentally the South African economy.
Figure 5: IEA multiple benefits of energy efficiency (IEA, 
2014)
Energy security is extremely 
important for the continued 
development and growth. The 
improvement of energy efficiency in 
power generation reduces the need 
for additional, costly investments in 
expanding the infrastructure. If this 
results in improved affordability of 
services, it frees up disposable 
income within households, 
improving quality of life. 
Non-electricity related energy 
efficiency measures, such as the 
use of improved biomass cook 
stoves, improve the indoor climate 
and reduce smoke inhalationrelated illnesses. 
As described in Section 1, significant progress has been made in improving energy 
efficiency since the 2005 NEES. However, despite the benefits, there are still 
significant barriers to further improving energy efficiency, including the economic 
downturn and decreases in commodity prices, which is reportedly encouraging 
industry and mining to focus on increasing throughput. Market failures, such as
energy service companies that do not have the capacity to adopt innovative 
financing and technology solutions, the high costs of energy efficient appliances, and 
the negative incentive of high borrowing rates, reduce the uptake of energy efficient 
solutions. The work to address some of these failures has begun through the 
introduction of labelling of appliances and vehicles, and the introduction of energy 
efficiency standards for appliances and in buildings. However, more needs to be 
done.
Within the private sector, particularly in the energy intensive sub-sectors, the 
feedback from consultations indicates that many of the most easily achieved savings 
have been implemented. Without additional incentives, the payback period on 
investments to implement the more challenging savings is considered to be too long Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
10
for investors.8 There are often operations and transaction costs of implementing 
energy efficiency measures, such as energy audit costs and time spent researching 
and discussing options, that are an added disincentive. The emphasis is mostly 
placed on expanding operations where possible, as increasing throughput is the 
highest priority for many businesses. 
The 12L tax rebate mechanism for energy efficiency projects aims to trigger 
investments that are currently considered to have a weak business case. It is already 
apparent that this has been successful in sparking new interest in implementing 
projects, particularly following the recent increase in the level of rebate offered. 
However, the mechanism does preclude some key players that could make use of 
the incentive, such as real estate investment trusts (REITs) as they are not the final 
tax payer.
The planned introduction of a carbon tax during 2017 will put pressure on industry in 
particular to reduce their energy consumption and the indications are that the tax 
combined with increased electricity prices are placing a significant strain on the 
sector. The 12L and other suggested incentives will support industry in implementing
energy efficiency projects that result in significant savings but are more challenging.
4.4. Energy efficiency potential in the South Africa 
The efficiency savings made since 2000 illustrate that significant achievements have 
been made across particularly the industrial and residential sectors, primarily due to 
the reaction to increased energy prices and technology improvements.9 Based on 
international comparisons and historical trends, there is potential to continue making 
improvements, some of which are happening autonomously.
The energy intensity of South Africa is higher than the other BRIC countries. In 
comparison to similar10 economies, South Africa‟s industry sector is far from being 
amongst the worst performing, but is somewhat more energy intensive than
Macedonia, Serbia and Australia, for example (Table 3 below).
Table 3: Industrial energy intensity – a comparison of South Africa with similar economies (World Bank, 
2016)
Industry sector energy 
intensity (MJ/$)
Relative to South Africa
Australia 2.8 0.67
Serbia 3.3 0.79
Macedonia 3.7 0.88
South Africa 4.2
Brazil 6.1 1.45
 
8 Based on stakeholder feedback during preliminary consultations, the significant measures that make business 
sense to invest in have largely been implemented. There are some less significant savings to be made (e.g. 
lighting).
9 Energy Efficiency Target Monitoring System Report, 2015
10 Similar economies in terms of economic activities and proportion of GDP from the industrial and mining subsectors.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
11
China 6.3 1.50
Kazakhstan 12.0 2.86
Based on the current data that is currently available11, the following energy savings 
potentials were identified, taking into account the historical trends and comparing this 
against international best practice. The secondary data that was used as the 
foundation for the analysis were questioned on the basis that they are not reflective 
of the local context. The potentials reflected below do not translate into targets, so a 
bottom-up approach has been used for the estimation of targets for each sector.
Industrial and mining sectors
In order to achieve the world average performance levels within the iron and steel 
industry, a reduction in specific energy consumption of 38% (from 24.3 GJ/tonne to 
15GJ/tonne) would be required, based on South Africa‟s current technology mix in 
iron and steel production. Based on a comparison with international best practice, a
46% reduction in energy intensity (from 24.3 GJ/tonne to 13.2GJ/tonne) may appear
to be possible for the industrial sectors if the improvements in specific energy 
consumption are also combined with the shift in the iron and steel production 
technology mix. However, the consultations with sub-sector representatives indicate 
that there are significant factors that affect the feasibility for the iron and steel sector 
to achieve these potentials, specifically due to the quality of coal available to the 
processes.
For the various mining sub-sectors that includes coal, gold, platinum and other nonferrous metals an overall energy savings of 8.7% (6.4PJ or 1.43TWh) could be 
achieved by conforming to best practice methods. However, if further research and 
development (R&D) activities are undertaken, particularly in grinding techniques, an 
overall energy saving of 24.5% (18PJ or 5TWh) could be achieved. Consultations 
with the Chamber of Mines and some of its members highlighted the challenges for 
underground mining in achieving energy efficiencies. As excavation goes deeper, 
specific energy consumption increases.
Transport sector 
Due to the lack of data for the transport sector, a number of assumptions were made 
to establish the savings potentials that could be realized by 2030. As described 
below, the range of savings potentials is wide. The passenger vehicle parc average 
fuel economy (taking into account the mix of vehicle vintages; their corresponding 
fuel economies and annual mileage) ranges from an improvement of 16% to 31%
(gasoline cars). The CO2 intensity for transport sector improves by between 3% and
27% for passenger vehicles. The potential for improvements in freight are between 
18 % and 37%.
 
11 The following analysis made use of existing data, including the Green House Gas mitigation studies produced 
by the Department of Environmental Affairs, and analysis of municipal energy savings potentials by Surya Power. 
Refer to the Energy Savings Potential report (September 2015) for further information.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
12
Residential sector
Three energy savings opportunities were identified as having sizeable potential, 
appliances, lighting and buildings. Significant energy savings are possible if the Solar 
Water Heating (SWH) and Mass Roll Out (MRO) programmes are continued within 
the residential sector. From the period of 2010-14, 600 GWh of electricity has been 
saved through the SWH programme resulting in an abatement of 630 kt of CO2
emissions. Through the MRO initiative a saving of 729 GWh of electricity and an 
abatement of 765.45 kt of CO2 has been achieved.
The electricity savings (12.1 TWh) proposed within the cost effective scenario would 
contribute to roughly 20% of revised 2030 baselines. These savings would then 
translate to roughly 12.75 Mt of CO2 emissions. The proposed savings would mean a 
6.8% decrease in household electricity intensity between 2010 and 2030.
Energy efficiency possibilities using passive thermal design could bring about 
additional energy efficiency of around 5% within the residential sector. The costs 
associated with refurbishment are cited as the low applicability and uptake of this 
measure. Improving the energy efficiency of new buildings is much more costeffective than the refurbishing existing building stock. Therefore, improving the 
existing building codes are a priority and should be emphasised as part of the 
National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP).
In the case of the residential sector, within the lower income households, the use of 
biomass for cooking is significant. Within LSM1 (the lowest bracket of the „Living 
Standards Measure‟ stratification system developed by SAARF12), biomass fuels are 
used for both cooking and water heating by 60% of households (EETMS, 2015). 
Supporting the propagation of energy efficient cooking technologies has the potential 
to reduce the consumption on wood by between 40-60%13, equivalent to a saving of 
about 10PJ for the residential sector if these savings were achieved in all 
households using woodfuel. The contribution to overall efficiency is not significant, 
because only about 7% of households in total depend on wood for cooking.
However, the impact of these savings on the individual households affected is
potentially huge, not only in terms of money, time and effort, but also the added 
health and environmental benefits from the reduction of indoor pollution. Note that 
the potential for savings from more efficient biomass stoves will continue only while
the low LSM households do not have access to modern energy sources such as 
electricity and / or liquefied petroleum gas (LPG).
Public and commercial sector
End-use energy consumption within the public building sector is expected to 
increase to 125.13PJ in 2030 from 62.4PJ in 2012 levels. These increases can be 
curtailed by 19.7PJ, which is a decrease of roughly 16%, by conducting 
refurbishments and interventions in space heating, lighting and improved building 
practices based on the current version of the SANS10400-XA. Future tightening of 
the standards and enforcement would achieve greater savings, provided they are 
 
12 South African Audience Research Foundation – see for example http://www.saarf.co.za/lsm/lsms.asp
13 http://cleancookstoves.org/resources_files/household-cookstoves-1.pdfPost-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
13
enforced. A reduction of 4.21 Mt of emissions can be achieved via interventions, 
mainly through solar water heating and roof top photovoltaic systems. The largest 
potential of saving is from the new stock of office building category and renovations 
to existing stock, although the most cost-effective is in addressing the new stock.
Within municipal services, based on interventions in a sample of major 
municipalities, energy savings of 47% for bulk-water supply and water treatment, 
32% for the municipal vehicle fleet, 25% for street lighting and 16% for buildings and 
facilities could be achieved.
Utilities sector
Considerable reductions in coal usage (22.9%), CO2 emissions (15.5%) and overall 
electricity usage (15.7%) can be achieved by the year 2030 within the electricity 
(utilities) sector, if the savings scenario that constitutes a greater share of renewable 
technologies and advanced coal technologies, is considered.
The overall thermal efficiencies of the power plant can be improved from the current 
average of 33% to roughly 38% by the year 2030 with the inclusion of super critical 
boiler higher efficiency coal power plants and integrated gasification combined cycle 
(IGCC) type power plants. Retirement of older power plants, particularly return-toservice plants, will improve overall power efficiency.
It is estimated that 18% of electricity that is bought from Eskom by municipalities is 
lost. Based on data provided by Eskom, 22,351 GWh were lost in 2013 in distribution 
and transmission. The City of Johannesburg has distribution losses of 22%, which 
comprise both technical and non-technical losses (i.e. illegal connections, inaccurate 
billing, defective meters, etc). Some municipalities report distribution losses of 
between 30-40%. Converting long distance transmission lines to a higher voltage or 
underground cables, which are capital-intensive measures, can reduce transmission 
losses. Distribution losses can be reduced by minimising theft and tampering via the 
means of social awareness and programmes.
Agricultural sector
Though the agricultural sector accounts for only 3% of total energy consumption, 
energy savings measures can bring relief to farmers from rising electricity prices and 
volatile fuel prices. Major energy consuming activities in the agricultural sector 
include traction and irrigation. Activities related to traction are mostly petroleum 
product based whereas irrigation relies on electricity.
Case studies from South American onion cultivation have shown possible fuel 
savings of 44% by optimising ploughing and raking activities. Fuel savings of roughly 
15% can be achieved by regularly maintaining traction equipment. The potential of 
savings by the means of fuel switching to various blends of biodiesel needs to be 
investigated.
Case studies in South African farms, where variable speed drives were fitted to 
pumps used for irrigation and water transfer, were seen to achieve roughly 40% 
savings in electricity consumption.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
14
5. Pathway to realising South Africa’s energy efficient future
By combining fiscal, legal and regulatory, institutional and financial initiatives the 
Strategy outlines a sectoral approach that will deliver results. A package of 
measures is described for each sector to address the identified barriers to realising
the untapped savings potentials. Each package is framed by a goal(s) and target(s), 
which link them to the Results Framework in Annex A. This Results Framework 
presents a ‘chain of causality‟ that outlines the expected outcomes of the measures 
and the impacts likely to result at the sectoral and economy-wide level.
In order for the DoE to assess its performance, it is necessary to specify targets in a 
way that is useful and relevant. Where policy measures are operating in synergy as 
part of an integrated package, it makes little sense to define targets relating to each 
measure, since it may be impossible or at least impractical to disentangle the effects 
of the individual measures. However, it is equally unhelpful to set targets at too 
aggregated a level, because the causal link between the actions taken and the 
effects observed is then insufficiently direct. This would make it difficult to determine 
whether the actions have been successful, or whether the observed effects are 
actually due to some exogenous influences. The targets have therefore been 
specified in a way that makes them both relevant and feasible to monitor.
The following sections describe the packages of measures for each sector, and an 
explanation of the basis for the setting of each of the sector targets. In general, the 
levels at which the targets have been set derive from a combination of the expected 
effects of the policy measures proposed, plus the estimated effects of the 
continuation of existing policy measures and an assumed level of autonomous 
change. Details of the assumptions and approximations underlying these figures are 
given in Annex D.
Estimates have also been made of the likely sectoral and economy-wide impacts of 
achieving the targets, in terms of the percentage changes in total final energy 
consumption that would be revealed by a decomposition analysis conducted in 2030. 
The indirect measures that support the successful implementation of the Strategy, 
ensuring that the institutional framework is in place, are described in Section 6.Goal
Target
Accelerate the current rate of improvement in the energy consumption per square metre in
buildings occupied by the public sector at the national, provincial and municipal levels
A 50% reduction in the specific energy consumption (measured as GJ annual energy
consumption per m2 of occupied floor area) by 2030 relative to a 2015 baseline.
Goal
Target
Accelerate the current rate of improvement in the energy consumption per square metre in
buildings occupied by the public sector at the national, provindal and municipal levels
A 50% reduction In the specific energy consumption (measured as W annual energy
consumption per m' of occupied floor area) by 2030 relative to a 2015 baseline.
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
15
5.1. The public sector
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
The Measures
The public sector in South Africa has begun the process of institutionalising the 
principle of “Leading by Example”, which aims to address energy efficiency across 
national and provincial buildings owned or occupied by government. Although the 
contribution of the public sector to final energy consumption is only 2-3% of the total, 
the government recognises the importance of leading by example, demonstrating a 
commitment to improving efficiency across the public sector. The significant civil 
service workforce (over 2 million civil servants in 201414) presents an opportunity not 
only to improve the performance of buildings used by government but also to raise 
awareness among the civil service.
The two main themes of the package of policy measures for the public sector are 
therefore to build institutional energy efficiency culture, both within the sector but 
also in the interface with its clients, and to substantially reduce the average specific 
energy consumption of the stock of buildings owned or rented by the government.
The “Leading by Example” brand is being developed within the Department of Public 
Works and supports the programmes of building retrofits, raising awareness and 
greening of procurement. The Department of Energy intends to take the opportunity 
to develop the brand across all government departments, raising the awareness of 
all government employees of their role in improving energy efficiency and tasking 
them to make those improvements. This will require that energy efficiency becomes 
a component of the organisational culture. There is also significant potential to 
improve public understanding of energy efficiency and influence user behaviour 
through the mainstreaming of energy efficiency across the public-facing services 
provided by the sector. For example, the introduction of energy awareness in the 
national school curriculum, the display of notices in hospitals and clinics, and for 
municipalities to be a conduit to share energy saving advice with their residents 
(described further in Section 5.2). A strong element of this culture will be the 
identification of energy champions in each government department at national, 
provincial and municipal levels, who will be tasked to drive the initiative forward. 
For public buildings, the current initiatives to improve energy efficiency within 
buildings will be continuously improved and increase in the level of ambition. The 
energy efficiency of new buildings will be driven by means of successive tightening 
of building standards throughout the Strategy period. The intended trajectory for 
the tightening of standards is being formulated and will be announced well in 
 
14 Quarterly Employment Statistics, Statistics South Africa, June 2014Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
16
advance, to provide sufficient time for both the construction industry and government 
officials responsible for ensuring compliance to adapt. This will improve energy 
performance of the new stock of buildings that are either built or bought by the public 
sector.
The mandatory display of energy performance certificates (EPCs) in government 
owned properties is currently being implemented. This will be extended to buildings 
being rented by government on signing of a new lease. To support this, green 
leases will become a standard requirement for all properties rented by the public 
sector on the uptake of new leases, specifically requiring the provision of information 
on resource consumption to the building occupiers in managed properties. The 
nomination of trained energy managers for each publicly owned building will ensure 
that energy use is being proactively addressed and improve the availability of data 
for monitoring purposes.
The introduction of green procurement has been initiated within the DPW and will 
include life-cycle assessments. The intention is to roll this out across government, 
reflecting our commitment to reducing the adverse environmental impacts of the 
goods and services that are purchased. 
Mandatory labelling is already in place, and minimum energy performance standards 
(MEPS) have been introduced or are proposed for most of the major categories of 
household appliance. Broadening the scope of mandatory labelling and MEPs to 
cover appliances that are commonly used in the public sector (such as large-scale 
cooking and heating appliances) will facilitate the implementation of green 
procurement. In order to ensure that appliance manufacturers and suppliers are able 
to respond positively to tightening standards, the intended additional categories of 
equipment and the trajectory for tightening the MEPS will be announced well in 
advance.
The feasibility will be explored of introducing an energy endorsement label to run 
alongside the existing system of comparison labels for appliances. Endorsement 
labels are designed to provide purchasers with a simple yes/no indication that an 
endorsed product is among the most energy efficient in its class and could be used 
as a procurement criterion for the public sector. Experiences in several other 
countries suggest that a strongly branded endorsement label (of which the „Energy 
Star‟ brand is the most famous) may be a valuable complement to the system of 
comparison labels already in place.
The renovation of existing building stock in the public sector will require considerable 
investment. With this in mind, innovative financing models will be explored for the 
public sector, such as encouraging partnerships between local and international 
energy service companies (ESCOs) to secure the financing for large-scale 
renovations. The feasibility of establishing an ‘ESCO Incubator’ will be assessed. 
This would be a public sector body, the main function of which is to implement large 
public-sector projects through energy performance contracting, using local private 
sector ESCOs as sub-contractors. Other key functions of an ESCO Incubator may 
include: providing loans or equity finance for smaller energy performance contract 
projects, development of standardised energy performance contracts, technical 
assistance for project development, training and accreditation of ESCOs (see 
Section 6), developing databases of approved equipment and materials. Although Goal
Targets
Accelerate the reduction in the specific energy consumption per resident in delivering
municipal services
A 20% reduction in the energy Intensity (measured as energy consumption per head of
population served) of municipal service provision. The specific services included are
streetlighting, traffic lights, water supply and wastewater treatment.
A 30% reduction in the fossil fuel intensity of municipality vehicle fleets (measured as total
fossil fuel consumption by municipal vehicles per head of population served)
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
17
government would provide the core funding for establishing an ESCO Incubator, this 
would leverage additional funds from the private sector and from international 
financing institutions (IFIs) and international donors. This model therefore provides a 
more cost-effective use of public funds for achieving energy savings in public 
buildings compared with the provision of direct grants.
Basis for the Target
The target proposed for public buildings is for a 50% reduction in the specific energy 
consumption (annual energy consumption per m2
) of lettable / habitable floor area 
across the sector. 15 This target is based on an assumption that successive 
tightenings of building standards will result in reductions in specific energy 
consumption of 49% for half of the new buildings added between now and 2030, and 
67% for the other half. A concerted programme of eco-refurbishment for buildings 
that were constructed before 2015 is assumed to result in improvements in specific 
energy consumption averaging 35%. The weighted mean of these improvements 
across the whole 2030 building stock gives an overall reduction in specific energy 
consumption of 50%.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES
The Measures
The Energy Efficiency Demand-Side Management (EEDSM) programme established 
by the Department of Energy has been delivering grants to 68 municipalities in South 
Africa since 2009. The cumulative energy saved as a result of the programme based 
on projected targets is approximately 1.8 PJ, mainly through street lighting retrofits. 
The potential for energy saving is considered to be significant based on the 
measures identified under the EEDSM programme. The Local Government Energy 
Efficiency and Renewable Energy Strategy developed in 2013 defines a framework 
under which local government develop their individual energy efficiency approaches. 
The strategy covers the governance framework, energy efficiency in the provision of 
services, improving household energy access, improving energy efficiency at end 
use level, and energy efficiency in spatial planning, amongst other things. Several 
municipalities have taken the initiative to develop strategies but there is potential to 
 
15 Although the target for buildings would ideally separate the anticipated improvements from new and existing 
buildings, this is not possible based on the data that is available and the complexity of the data collection 
required for monitoring purposes. However, the strategy recognises that the stakeholders involved and the 
process of addressing the types of measures that relate to new and existing buildings differ.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
18
do much more. Municipalities have up to now identified isolated measures and do 
not have adequate data to understand their energy use profile.
The measures for municipal services address the need for a holistic approach to 
energy efficiency as a municipality, and the provision of support to implement the 
identified energy saving opportunities. The basis of the approach is to empower 
municipalities to identify the measures that are feasible and bring about the greatest 
return, both in terms of energy savings and on investment, and to source funding 
through a variety of mechanisms, rather than relying on the grant mechanism.
Municipalities will be required to submit energy efficiency strategies, which will be 
informed by a comprehensive energy audit of their services and activities, and 
aligned with the provincial strategies. 
On the basis of the energy audit and municipal strategy, the DoE will assist 
municipalities in developing energy management plans, associated business plans 
and financing proposals to source financing for the measures that are prioritised. By 
demonstrating clearly the current consumption patterns and potential for savings, 
alternative financing mechanisms could be exploited, such as energy 
performance contracts with private sector ESCOs, reducing the investment burden 
on the government and the municipality.
To contribute to the development of the “Leading by Example” brand, municipalities 
will participate in an energy-rating scheme. This could be incorporated into existing 
schemes that are recognised in South Africa, such as the green star rating. The 
emphasis will be on establishing a system that reflects the diversity of municipalities 
(in terms of population density, standard of living, population, etc.) and the energy 
efficiency of the services they offer.
Basis for the Targets
Two targets are proposed for the municipal services sector:
 20% reduction in the energy intensity (measures as energy consumption per 
head of population served) in the provision of electricity-intensive municipal 
services (namely, street lighting, traffic lights, water supply and wastewater 
treatment)
 30% reduction in the fossil fuel intensity of municipal vehicle fleets (measures 
as total fossil fuel consumption per head of population served).
The municipal services target is based on results of a simple spreadsheet model for 
estimating the potential savings from retrofitting streetlights and optimising pumping 
systems between now and 2030. The estimates were adjusted to take account of the 
savings that have already been achieved to date through the EEDSM programme.
The vehicle fleet target is based on the assumption that a 20% improvement in the 
technical efficiency the fleet (as per the Transport Sector target) is complemented by 
additional savings of 10% from a combination of driving training, optimising vehicle 
usage and substitution of alternative fuels.Goals
Targets
Transform the market for household appliances in favour of more energy efficient models
Substantially reduce the average specific energy consumption of the stock of residential buildings
A 33% reduction in the average specific energy consumption of new household appliances purchased in
South Africa by 2030 relative to a 2015 baseline
A 20% Improvement in the average energy performance of the residential building stock by 2030 relative to a
2015 baseline, as measured by the energy consumption (excluding plug loads) per square meter of habitable
space.
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
19
5.2. The residential sector
The Measures
South Africa‟s residential sector currently consists of about 16 million households, a 
number that is expected to increase to 19-20 million by 2030. The National 
Development Plan (NDP) emphasises the need to ensure that this growth in 
household numbers is accompanied by improved living standards and reductions in 
energy poverty and income inequality. As a consequence, the next 15 years will see 
a huge increase in the rate of ownership of household appliances, with many 
households acquiring a range of appliances for the first time. The NDP also commits 
to the provision of adequate housing for all, while the Department of Human 
Settlements (DoHS) has committed to ensuring that the goal of delivering affordable 
housing in sufficiently large volumes to meet the needs of the poor does not lead to 
compromises with regard to the energy efficiency of homes.
The two main themes of the package of policy measures for the residential sector 
are therefore to transform the market for household appliances in favour of more
energy efficient models, and to substantially reduce the average specific energy 
consumption of the stock of residential buildings.
For household appliances, mandatory labelling is already in place, and minimum 
energy performance standards (MEPS) have been introduced or are proposed for 
most of the major categories of appliance. Successive tightening of appliance 
MEPS will ensure that the market is continually pushed in the direction of improved 
energy efficiency for the duration of the Strategy period. In order to ensure that 
appliance manufacturers and suppliers are able to respond positively to tightening 
standards, the intended trajectory that MEPS will follow will be announced well in 
advance.
While MEPS provide a “market push”, appliance labelling aims to pull the market 
towards improved energy efficiency by providing consumers with the information 
they need to choose more energy efficient models. The feasibility will be explored of 
introducing an energy endorsement label to run alongside the existing system of 
comparison labels for appliances. Endorsement labels are designed to provide 
appliance purchasers with a simple yes/no indication that an endorsed appliance is 
among the most energy efficient in its class. Experiences in several other countries 
suggest that a strongly branded endorsement label (of which the ‘Energy Star‟ brand 
is the most famous) may be a valuable complement to the system of comparison 
labels already in place.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
20
While appliance MEPS and labelling are expected to have a strong influence on the 
energy efficiency of new appliances, their effect may be significantly weakened if 
older, less efficient appliances are not removed from the stock of equipment in use. 
In particular, many lower-income households acquiring appliances for the first time 
may be tempted to purchase second-hand items which, although costing less upfront, will lock the owners into several years of higher energy bills. The feasibility of a 
scrappage scheme for appliances will therefore be investigated, whereby 
householders are incentivised to ensure that old appliances are disposed of (for 
example, by offering a trade-in against the purchase price of a new appliance).
For residential buildings, continuous improvement in the energy efficiency of new 
dwellings will be pushed by means of successive tightening of building 
standards throughout the Strategy period. As with appliance MEPS, the intended 
trajectory for the tightening of standards will be announced well in advance, to 
provide sufficient time for both the construction industry and the municipal officials 
responsible for ensuring compliance to adapt. For smaller municipalities in particular, 
this measure will probably require some degree of capacity building to be provided 
for building control officers. Efficient enforcement will also be a crucial element of 
strengthening compliance, which implies the need for effective sanctions for builders 
and authorities that fail to comply. 
The issuing of mandatory energy performance certificates (EPCs) for new 
construction provides a simple means of checking compliance with building 
standards. The cost-effectiveness and feasibility of introducing EPCs for existing 
dwellings will also be assessed (possibly on a voluntary basis initially), which would 
serve to provide a market pull in favour of more efficient buildings. A range of options 
may be explored, including incentivising the obtaining of an EPC through a small 
rebate on Transfer Duty to partially cover the cost, or making EPCs mandatory upon 
the transfer of a property. Mandatory EPCs will be considered for the rental sector, 
where the issue of split incentives is likely to limit the extent to which energy 
efficiency interventions take place. This would be consistent with the NDP, which 
acknowledges that insufficient attention has been paid in the past to the importance 
of the rental and social housing.
The aim of EPCs for residential buildings is to influence the property market through 
a price premium on more energy efficient homes, which would give householders an 
additional incentive (as well as the direct energy cost savings) to invest in energy 
efficiency measures with a longer payback period. However, experience from some 
countries suggests that this internalisation of energy performance into the property 
market is slow and uncertain. Consideration will therefore be given in the mediumterm to the provision of financial incentives to undertake thermal improvements
of existing residential buildings. These may take the form of direct grants for lower 
income groups, partial grants, low-interest loans, or rebates against Transfer Duty 
when the property is next sold.
To ensure that households are able to respond positively to market signals, 
programmes of awareness-raising and the provision of information will continue 
to be implemented, building on the Department of Energy‟s recently initiated energy 
efficiency campaign as well as other successful initiatives such as Eskom‟s 49M 
campaign, the energy education material developed by Eskom in partnership with 
the Department of Education, the Department for Environmental Affairs „MY2050‟ Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
21
calculator and the Eskom / WESSA (Wildlife and Environment Society of South 
Africa) resources on sustainable energy for use in schools the community.
A possible future direction for awareness-raising efforts is to engage municipalities 
in developing and disseminating materials that are specifically targeted at local 
populations. This is likely to be particularly important for lower income groups for 
whom energy consumption patterns have a disproportionately strong influence on 
the quality of life of the lowest income households. Firstly, energy costs constitute a 
much larger fraction of total household expenditure in low-income groups16; hence 
the inefficient use of energy represents a heavier financial burden for poorer 
households. Secondly, the types of energy carrier that are prevalent in low income 
households lead to a wide range of adverse effects (e.g. indoor air pollution, fire 
risks). Because the technologies used for cooking, water heating and space heating 
by the lowest income groups are not amenable to regulation or efficiency standards, 
the provision of targeted information and awareness-raising is likely to be the most 
effective means for bringing about improvements in efficiency and accelerating a 
shift towards more modern energy technologies such as SWHs and LPG.
Given the success of the Department of Energy‟s Energy Efficiency Demand Side 
Management programme in mobilising municipalities to deliver energy savings in 
municipal services, opportunities will also be explored for municipalities to play a 
direct role in achieving energy efficiency improvements in the residential sector. 
Areas where the involvement of municipalities may enhance the delivery of 
household energy efficiency programmes include:
 using their purchasing power when implementing retrofits on their own 
buildings to bulk-procure equipment and materials that is then made available 
for use in local residential sector projects
 facilitating the formation of residents‟ action groups as vehicles for the 
bundling of individual household energy efficiency project into packages that 
may be more attractive to local contractors
As described in the section „Generation and distribution‟ below, consideration will 
also be given to placing an energy savings obligation on distributors of energy. 
Such obligations would require municipalities, in their role as suppliers of electricity, 
to implement measures to bring about energy savings among the customers they 
serve – in particular, household customers. Since the sale of electricity to residential 
consumers is an important source of municipal income, the design of an obligation 
scheme would need to ensure that successful implementation does not reduce the 
income stream of municipalities to the extent that the delivery of other key services is 
compromised.
Basis for the Targets
Two targets are proposed for the residential sector:
 
16 According to the StatsSA report “Income and Expenditure of Households 2010/11”, households in the lowest 
expenditure decile spend 6.4% of their total household expenditure on energy, versus 1.7% for those in the 
highest expenditure decile.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
22
 33% reduction in the average specific energy consumption of new household 
appliances purchased
 20% improvement in the average energy performance of the residential 
building stock
The appliances target is based on an assumption that there will be two successive 
tightenings of minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) between now and 
2030, as described in Annex D. The overall targeted reduction in average specific 
energy consumption is derived from a weighted mean of the individual reductions by 
appliance type, weighted according to expected sales.
The buildings target is based on a combination of a 38% average improvement in the 
energy performance of new buildings by 2030 through tightening of building 
standards17, and a 15% improvement in the thermal performance of dwellings built
before 2015, achieved through thermal retrofits. Since new dwellings built after 2015 
are expected to account for 20% of all homes by 2030, the weighted mean of the two 
factors described above leads to an overall average improvement of approximately 
20% across the whole 2030 stock of buildings.
 
17 Based on a low turnover of residential building stock than in the commercial and public sectors.Goal
Target
Accelerate the current rate of improvement in the energy consumption per square metre of
lettable/ inhabited floor space in the commercial sector
A 37% reduction in the specific energy consumption (measured as GJ annual energy
consumption per m2 of lettable / habitable floor area) by 2030 relative to a 2015 baseline
Goal
Target
Accelerate the current rate of Improvement in the energy consumption per square metre of
lettable/ inhabited floor space in the commercial sector
A 37% reduction in the specific energy consumption (measured as GJ annual energy
consumption per m2 of lettable / habitable floor area) by 2030 relative to a 2015 baseline
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
23
5.3. The commercial sector
The Measures
The commercial sector in South Africa includes a very broad range of activities, 
including wholesale and retail trade, the motor trade, the hospitality industry, and a 
range of business services. The commercial sector accounts about 4-5% of total final 
energy consumption, primarily in the form of electricity. Due to the varied nature and 
scale of the activities, measures for the commercial sectors have generally focused 
on improving the energy efficiency of the building envelope. SANS 204:2011 and 
SANS 10400-XA address the efficiency standards to be reached by new buildings
(notwithstanding the need for a significant tightening of SANS 10400-XA at the 
earliest opportunity). However, as with other buildings sectors, the energy efficiency 
in the existing building stock is challenging to address. The commercial property 
sector has been specifically active in improving energy efficiency, specifically of 
managed buildings for which the landlord is responsible for energy bills.
The two main themes of the package of policy measures for the commercial sector 
are therefore to continue the significant progress made by tightening regulation, and 
providing financial incentives to improve the business case for deeper 
improvements.
For commercial buildings, the current initiatives to improve energy efficiency within 
buildings will be continuously improved and the level of ambition increased. The 
energy efficiency of new buildings will be driven by means of successive tightening 
of building standards throughout the Strategy period. The intended trajectory for 
the tightening of standards is being formulated and will be announced well in 
advance, to provide sufficient time for both the construction industry and government 
officials responsible for ensuring compliance to adapt. 
The mandatory display of energy performance certificates (EPCs) in buildings will 
be extended to all rented commercial properties. The introduction of green leases in 
buildings occupied by public sector institutions is likely to make these leases more 
commonplace (see Section 5.1). These measures need to be accompanied by 
awareness raising in the sector to stimulate demand for greater efficiency in 
buildings, thereby affecting market prices.
Mandatory labelling is already in place, and minimum energy performance standards 
(MEPS) have been introduced or are proposed for most of the major categories of 
household appliance, some of which may also be used in the commercial sector. 
Broadening the scope of mandatory labelling and MEPs to cover appliances that 
are commonly used in the commercial sector (such as large-scale cooking 
appliances, refrigeration, space heating, ventilation and air conditioning) will 
gradually improve overall appliance efficiency as they are replaced. In order to 
ensure that appliance manufacturers and suppliers are able to respond positively to Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
24
tightening standards, the intended additional categories of equipment and the 
trajectory for tightening the MEPS will be announced well in advance. Where the use 
of specific types of appliances is considered to having a significant effect on energy 
consumption in the commercial sector, a scrappage scheme could be considered to 
encourage the replacement of old appliances however sector-specific research 
would need to be performed by the innovation hub (see Section 6) to identify the 
significance of the potentials and understand the implications of this. 
The feasibility will be explored of introducing an energy endorsement label to run 
alongside the existing system of comparison labels for appliances. Endorsement 
labels are designed to provide purchasers with a simple yes/no indication that an 
endorsed product is among the most energy efficient in its class. Experiences in 
several other countries suggest that a strongly branded endorsement label (of which 
the „Energy Star‟ brand is the most famous) may be a valuable complement to the 
system of comparison labels already in place.
The renovation of existing building stock in the commercial sector is challenging as, 
for the most part, tenants are responsible for the energy bills, removing the incentive 
for landlords to take action as they do not see a return on the investment. Therefore, 
until the display of EPCs has an affect on demand for greater energy efficiency in the 
commercial sector, alternative financing solutions need to be exploited. The 12L, 
which currently cannot be accessed by property trusts, will be reviewed to establish 
how it can become relevant for the commercial sector. However, the business case 
for deeper energy efficiency retrofits may require a specific incentive mechanism, 
targeting large impact initiatives, where the incentive is provided to ESCOs to 
achieve high levels of savings, while levels of activity are maintained.
Basis for the Targets
The target proposed for the commercial buildings sector is a 37% reduction in the 
specific energy consumption (annual energy consumption per m2
) of lettable / 
habitable floor area across the sector. This target is based on an assumption that 
successive tightening of building standards will yield an average improvement in 
specific energy consumption across all new buildings of 54% by 2030. Retrofits of 
existing buildings are assumed to result in an average improvement in specific 
energy consumption of 20%. Since new buildings are assumed to account for half of 
the 2030 building stock, the weighted mean of these improvements in a 37% 
reduction in specific energy consumption across the whole sector.Goal
Targets
Create an enabling environment for the full exploitation of energy efficiency opportunities
across the manufacturing and mining sectors
A 16% reduction in weighted mean specific energy consumption in manufacturing by 2030
relative to a 2015 baseline
A cumulative total annual energy saving of 40 RI arising from specific energy saving
interventions undertaken by mining companies
Goal
Targets
Create an enabling environment for the full exploitation of energy efficiency opportunities
across the manufacturing and mining sectors
A 16% reduction in weighted mean specific energy consumption in manufacturing by 2030
relative to a 2015 baseline
A cumulative total annual energy saving of 40 RI arising from specific energy saving
interventions undertaken by mining companies
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
25
5.4. The industry and mining sector
The Measures
South Africa‟s industry and mining sector accounted for about 23% of total GDP in 
2014, and employed around 2.2 million people. As of 2012, the sector was 
responsible for about 34% of the country‟s total final energy consumption. The iron & 
steel industry and the mining industry each accounted for about one-fifth of the 
sector‟s total energy consumption, while non-ferrous metals, non-metallic minerals 
and chemicals were together responsible for a further 27% of consumption. 
At about 12 MJ per US$ of value-added in 2012, the energy intensity of 
manufacturing in South Africa was over twice the average level in the European 
Union. However, international comparisons of this kind must be approached with 
caution because of the widely differing circumstances in different countries. In fact, a 
study by the International Energy Agency suggests the scope for energy savings 
beyond business as usual is a relatively modest 10% by 2030. Most of this potential 
exists outside of the main energy intensive processes (blast furnaces, smelters, 
cement kilns etc.), in areas such as heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), 
lighting, generic motor-driven systems and energy management.
The focus of the industry and mining sector policy measures is to build on the 
significant progress already being made by the front-runners, while creating an 
enabling environment for all players within the sector to fully exploit all available costeffective energy efficiency opportunities. Shorter-term actions are particularly 
important, to ensure that the whole sector is equipped to respond effectively to the 
current challenges of the current global economic climate and rapidly increasing 
electricity prices.
Current efforts to promote the widespread adoption of energy management 
systems (EnMS) will be continued. The mandatory preparation and submission of 
energy management plans will be introduced for enterprises whose annual energy 
consumption exceeds 180 TJ. Alongside this, a second phase of the previously 
successful UNIDO Industrial Energy Efficiency programme will continue to 
mainstream the introduction of EnMS through capacity building, policy development 
and demonstration projects. To support and complement these efforts, consideration 
will be given to the development of appropriate schemes to incentivise the 
introduction of EnMS and ISO 50001 certification, particularly among enterprises that 
are not directly reached by the Industrial Energy Efficiency (IEE) programme and are 
not covered by the regulation for mandatory energy management plans.
The approach of providing a comprehensive service of targeted advice, 
information, assistance and subsidised energy audits has proved successful in Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
26
South Africa. The Private Sector Energy Efficiency (PSEE) programme run by the 
National Business Initiative provided such a service, but it ended at the end of 2015. 
Potential sources of funding, effective delivery mechanisms and an appropriate 
hosting body will therefore be identified to allow the development of a permanent 
successor scheme to PSEE, particularly focussing on the needs of small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). Recognising that improved energy efficiency 
impacts positively on the financial strength of SMEs, the potential role of the banking 
sector as delivery agents will be explored. Consideration will also be given to 
integrating the provision of these services into the broader functions offered by the 
proposed sectoral innovation hubs (See Section 6).
While the provision of advice and audits and the wider adoption of EnMS are 
important in increasing awareness of the opportunities for improved energy 
efficiency, significant energy savings will result only if these initiatives are coupled 
with programmes and measures to enhance the flow of investment into energy 
efficiency. At present, this role is being fulfilled mainly by the Green Energy 
Efficiency Fund (GEEF) operated by the Industrial Development Corporation, since 
both the Manufacturing Competitiveness Enhancement Programme and much of 
Eskom‟s Integrated Demand Management are currently on hold. The Department of 
Energy will therefore continue to collaborate with the National Treasury, the 
Department of Trade and Industry and other government departments, with 
international financial institutions and donor organisations, with the local banking 
sector and with industry sector stakeholders to ensure that appropriate and effective 
financing schemes for energy efficiency continue to be developed and sustained.
The 12L tax incentive scheme will remain a key component of the Department of 
Energy‟s approach to encouraging energy efficiency improvement in the industry and 
mining sector. The uptake of 12L is likely to improve following the recent increase in 
incentive levels and the extension of eligibility to include cogeneration projects. 
However, it is recognised that a number of outstanding issues limit the attractiveness 
of the scheme to some of its intended target group. Efforts are currently in progress 
to address these constraints, and in particular to streamline and simplify the 
monitoring and verification (M&V) procedures. Moving forward, a process will be put 
in place for the continued review and improvement to the 12L scheme, to ensure 
that it remains effective and relevant. Associated with this, work will continue with the 
Measurement and Verification Council of South Africa, South African National 
Accreditation System (SANAS) and other key stakeholders to facilitate the continued 
development of a dynamic and competitive monitoring and verification (M&V) sector.
Minimum energy performance standards (MEPS) for industrial electric motors
and motor-driven systems have been shown to be effective in many parts of the 
world. However, the impact of MEPS may be constrained if they are introduced in 
isolation, so they will be introduced as part of a wider coordinated approach to 
transforming the market for industrial electric motors. This will also include: 
awareness-raising and support relating to the importance of overall system 
optimisation; tighter regulation of the motor rewinding industry; the use of differential 
import duties to reduce / eliminate the price differential between standard and 
premium efficiency motors. MEPS may also be extended to include packaged motordriven systems (pumps, compressors, fans etc.).Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
27
For industrial boilers, MEPS are impractical because of the wide range of different 
operating conditions under which boilers are used. Instead, a more effective means 
of ensuring satisfactory levels of performance are achieved is to specify mandatory 
minimum design standards. These would generally require the inclusion of design 
features such as combustion controls, an economiser and a variable speed drive on 
the combustion air blower. The feasibility will therefore be explored of introducing 
mandatory minimum design standards for industrial boilers in South Africa.
While MEPS / mandatory design standards will ensure that the worst-performing 
devices are removed from the market, the process of energy efficient procurement 
would be greatly simplified with the use of a simple, well-recognised endorsement 
label for high energy performance to run alongside MEPS. The most well known
example of this is the Energy Star brand in the US, which provides an independent 
and trustworthy indication that the device in question is among the best-performing in 
its class. The feasibility of developing a clearly branded endorsement label specific 
to South Africa will therefore be evaluated.
Basis for the Targets
Two targets are proposed for the industry & mining sector:
 16% reduction in the weighted mean specific energy consumption of 
manufacturing
 40 PJ cumulative annual saving from energy efficiency interventions in mining
The manufacturing target is based on an assumption of an average 5% energy 
saving in the energy-intensive process-specific activities (e.g. blast-furnaces, 
smelters, cement kilns etc.) along with an average 35% saving in generic energyusing activities (HVAC, lighting, pumps, conveyers etc.) including the effects of 
behavioural change.
The mining sector target is based on an estimate of the typical savings achieved by 
the major mining companies over recent years combined with a synthesis of their 
stated energy saving targets expressed for the near future. Note that the mining 
target is expressed as a bottom-up summation of the effects of individual energy 
savings initiatives, because neither specific energy consumption (energy per unit of 
product mined) nor energy intensity (energy per unit of economic output) is a 
satisfactory proxy for energy efficiency in mining.i
Goal
Target
Contribute to the modernisation of the sector and the rebuilding of an inclusive rural
economy by addressing the inefficient use of energy in agriculture
A total electricity saving of 1 Pl through officially supported projects by 2030
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
28
5.5. The agriculture sector
The Measures
The agriculture sector (including forestry and fishing) accounts for only about 2% of 
South Africa‟s total final energy consumption, and a similar fraction of total GDP. 
However, it is a key sector from a social perspective, as it has been estimated by 
Statistics South Africa that as many as 20% of all South African households are 
directly connected with agriculture. Addressing the inefficient use of energy in 
agriculture therefore has the potential to contribute to the modernisation of the sector 
as part of the process of rebuilding an inclusive rural economy. 
Relatively little research has been conducted in opportunities for energy savings in 
the agricultural sector. A few case studies have highlighted the considerable savings 
potential in motor-driven systems (irrigation pumps, fans, dryers etc.), but given the 
large fraction of energy consumption that is accounted for by petroleum products, it 
is likely that significant energy savings are possible in agricultural vehicles. Despite 
the opportunities for energy savings in agriculture, and the potential for multiple 
benefits in terms of building a modern, thriving rural economy, there have been no 
energy efficiency programmes specifically targeting the sector to date. Exploratory 
consultation is required with stakeholders from the agricultural sector to gain a better 
understanding of energy use patterns and the opportunities for energy savings, 
particularly among the smaller farms and smallholders.
Large percentage savings in electricity consumption have been shown to be possible 
through the optimisation of motor-driven systems. The provision of training and 
high-quality targeted awareness-raising material may therefore be expected to 
yield significant impacts. Partnerships will be developed with the Agricultural 
Research Council (ARC), the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
and with sector associations such as the African Farmers‟ Association (AFASA) and 
Agri South Africa for the design, development and dissemination of such materials. 
In particular, the possibility will be explored for including modules on energy 
efficiency in the training courses run by ARC and by SABI (the South African 
Irrigation Institute).
Since two-thirds of the energy consumed in agriculture is in the form of petroleum 
products, this suggests a significant savings potential in vehicles. More research is 
required to derive a full understanding of the patterns of fuel use, and to identify 
specific areas where fuel savings may be realised. Based on the findings of this 
research, the DoE will work in partnership with the relevant sector stakeholders to 
develop awareness-raising campaigns around vehicle use in the agricultural 
sector.
Avenues for mobilising funding for energy efficiency improvements will be assessed 
and developed. For small farmers, it is likely that the use of direct grants to 
support capital expenditure on energy efficiency improvements would be the 
most effective route. Efforts will therefore be made in partnership with DAFF to Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
29
secure a National Treasury budget allocation for this purpose. For larger projects, 
mobilising funding will involve working with SANEDI and the National Treasury to 
ensure that the 12L tax incentive scheme meets the needs of the sector. The 
agricultural sector is also likely to prove an attractive source of carbon-offset
projects, since the sector will fall outside of the scope of the proposed carbon tax. A 
further potential source of finance is through energy performance contracts with 
ESCOs, financed through normal bank financing, or through Eskom‟s ESCO 
programme. The scope will be explored for providing targeted training to support the 
development of specialist agricultural ESCOs.
Basis for the Targets
The target proposed for the agriculture sector is a total electricity saving of 1 PJ from 
officially supported energy saving projects. This target is based on an assumption 
that sector-wide savings from the optimisation of motor-driven systems (mainly 
irrigation, but also drying, cooling and ventilation) amount to about 2-4 PJ annually, 
with a significant fraction of that potential being realised though official support. Note 
that no target has been set for fuel savings in agricultural vehicles, because it is not 
certain that the data would be available to allow such a target to be monitored. 
However, it is recommended that the situation is periodically reviewed and a target 
set if future data availability permits.Goal
Targets
To bring about significant improvements to the average fuel efficiency of the fleet of road
transport vehicles in South Africa.
A 20% reduction in the average vehicle energy intensity (measured in MJ /km) of the South
African road vehicle fleet relative to a 2015 baseline.
Goal
Targets
To bring about significant improvements to the average fuel efficiency of the fleet of road
transport vehides in South Africa.
A 20% reduction in the average vehide energy intensity (measured in MJ /km) of the South
African road vehicle fleet relative to a 2015 baseline.
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
30
5.6. The transport sector
The Measures
The transport sector in South Africa accounts for 27% of total final energy 
consumption (Energy Balance Tables, 2012), 90% of which is attributable to road 
transport. Between 2004 and 2012, the energy intensity of the transport sector has 
been relatively constant as compared to other sectors, although there are structural 
changes (such as modal shifts) that have occurred during this period that cannot be 
identified due to the current lack of data (EETMS, 2015). When it comes to improving 
energy efficiency in the transport sector, the most effective measures are complex 
and the largely fall outside the mandate of the Department of Energy, for example 
improving public infrastructure, town planning, and incentivising modal shifts. The 
Department of Transport has developed a Fuel Reduction Strategy (2015) and a 
GHG Emissions Reduction Strategy (2015) that aim to address these measures. 
Because of the dominance of road transport in terms of energy consumption, and the 
limited remit of the DoE in the transport sphere, the package of policy measures for 
the transport sector in this Strategy focuses on two main themes: to encourage the 
increase in supply of affordable and efficient vehicles, and to improve user 
behaviour, both of private drivers and commercial drivers. Inter-departmental 
collaboration is vital in this sector and therefore the Department of Energy will work 
closely with the Department of Transport and the Department of Environmental 
Affairs, as well as the South African National Roads Agency (SANRAL).
For all vehicles, the display of labels has been obligatory since 2008. These labels 
include average fuel consumption and CO2 emissions. Vehicle efficiency 
standards will be introduced to avoid new, inefficient vehicles being sold on the 
market. This naturally has implications for local vehicle manufacturers and therefore 
adequate notice will be provided to ensure that the industry can adapt. This will 
provide the push factor to filter out bad performing new vehicles.
However, in order to raise the average fuel efficiency of the vehicle parc, voluntary 
agreements will be established with manufacturers in the automotive industry to 
improve the average fuel efficiency of the vehicles they manufacture over and above 
the regulated minimum. The introduction of an incentive scheme will be considered 
that will levy an importation tax on vehicles on low efficiency vehicles that could be 
used to subsidise the purchase of efficient vehicles. To incentivise vehicle 
replacement, the feasibility of introducing a scrappage scheme will be assessed, 
with the aim of encouraging vehicle owners to replace old vehicles, effectively 
subsidising the individual to purchase a more efficient vehicle.
To improve the performance of vehicles on the road, the feasibility of incorporating 
fuel efficiency tests on vehicles during the roadworthiness test on change of 
ownership will be investigated. In the long term, the Department of Energy will work Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
31
with the Department of Transport and the Department of Environmental Affairs and 
municipalities to establish an annual environmental fitness test for vehicles, 
contributing to both fuel efficiency and a reduction in CO2 emissions. 
Improving driver behaviour is an effective mechanism through which to improve 
energy efficiency. The introduction of eco-driving will be incorporated into the 
curriculum for driving schools in order to raise the awareness of new drivers to the 
impact they have on how much fuel they consume. Voluntary agreements will be 
established with owners of large vehicle fleets, both freight and passenger 
companies, to define actions that can be taken to improve the performance of the 
vehicle fleet. This will include eco-driving education but also address the condition of 
their vehicles, specifically tyre condition and pressure.
Across the transport sector and for all modes of transport, knowledge sharing on 
best practice and improved technologies will be facilitated by the innovation hubs. 
The provision of specialised technical expertise for the transport sector will be 
promoted through the professionalization of ESCOs with transport-specific 
experience (see Section 6).
Basis for the Targets
The target proposed for the transport sector is a 20% reduction in the average 
energy intensity of the road vehicle fleet (determined from the vehicle energy 
consumption per km as specified on the fuel economy label). This target is based on 
an assumption that the average fuel efficiency of new vehicles will be about 50% 
lower than today (based on IEA estimates), combined with conservative assumptions 
about the rate of turnover of the stock of vehicles.Goal
Target
Accelerate the improvement of energy efficiency in the generation, transmission and
distribution of energy
A total of 10 PJ of electricity derived from grid- connected cogeneration plant by 2030
Average total electricity distribution losses below 8% by 2030, and average non -technical
losses below 0.5%
Goal
Target
Accelerate the improvement of energy efficiency In the generation, transmission and
distribution of energy
A total of 10 Pi of electricity derived from grid -connected cogeneration plant by 2030
Average total electricity distribution losses below 8% by 2030, and average non -technical
losses below 0.5%
Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
32
5.7. Production and distribution
The Measures
The Department of Energy Integrated Energy Plan (IEP) and Integrated Resource 
Plan (IRP) jointly define the anticipated energy mix with a view to informing policy to 
address future energy service needs efficiently and in the most socially beneficial 
manner. While the dominant role of coal-fired power is expected to continue through 
to 2030, solar PV, wind and other renewable energy sources are anticipated to 
increase in importance in the energy mix. The main mechanism for the promotion of 
renewable generation is the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer 
Procurement Programme (REIPPPP), which was launched in 2011 after earlier 
moves to introduce a feed-in tariff were unsuccessful.
Recent shortages of generation capacity have highlighted the necessity to improve 
energy efficiency at all points in the supply chain from generation through to end use. 
The National Development Plan specifically refers to energy generation and 
distribution as a pressing constraint on growth, investment and job creation. 
Although receiving little attention in the IEP / IRP, considerable potential exists in 
South Africa for the production of electricity from industrial cogeneration plant as well 
as from waste heat recovery. Eskom launched a procurement process for 
independent power producers (IPPs) using cogeneration in the mid-2000s but this
was unsuccessful. High investment costs and the lack of incentives provided by the 
current regulatory framework present barriers to the exploitation of the available 
potential.
Although bids for up to 800 MW of cogeneration capacity have recently been invited 
under the CogenIPPP programme, the level of response appears to be well below 
the capacity available. To expedite the full exploitation of the available resource, 
there is a need to review and address any remaining regulatory and financial 
barriers, and ensure that the terms of future procurement rounds (including the price 
cap) are attractive to prospective investors. At the same time, appropriate efficiency 
thresholds should be defined for plant to qualify, and steps taken to ensure that 
power produced qualifies for credits against any future carbon tax, to reflect the 
average carbon intensity of the grid power displaced. Further tenders may then be 
launched for the procurement of power from high-efficiency cogeneration and 
waste heat recovery.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
33
An internationally proven approach to stimulate significant end-use efficiency savings 
is to place energy efficiency obligations on various players in the energy sector. 
Such obligation schemes require obligated parties to achieve quantified savings 
among particular end-user groups (usually households, and sometimes also SMEs).
Schemes are generally designed such that obligations must be at least partly met by 
achieving energy savings in certain specific target groups (e.g. low income 
households). The most common model places an obligation on distributors / 
suppliers of electricity, but in some cases the obligation also extends to suppliers of 
other energy carriers and / or the operator of the high-voltage transmission network.
Assessments will be conducted to identify the optimum model for an energy 
efficiency obligation scheme in South Africa. One possible model would be to place 
the obligation on Eskom and on those municipalities that are involved in the supply 
of electricity. Setting a size threshold for such an obligation would ensure that only 
the largest municipalities would be obligated at the outset. Since schemes do not 
usually restrict obligated entities to achieve energy savings among their own 
customers, the potential may therefore be created for larger municipalities to achieve 
savings by forming partnerships with smaller non-obligated municipalities.
An alternative model is to place an obligation only on Eskom in its capacity as 
operator of the transmission grid. One route to meet its obligation would then be for 
Eskom to “buy” the savings that municipal suppliers of electricity were able to
achieve among their customers.
A further measure to be considered is to set mandatory targets on all generators 
for the achievement of efficiency savings within their „internal‟ operations (i.e. any 
operations not directly involved in the generation of power, such as buildings and 
vehicle fleets). Eskom has already made significant progress in this respect, through 
its Internal Energy Efficiency programme, but as more IPPs begin to emerge it is 
essential that all meet the same high standards of internal energy efficiency. This will 
ensure that the power generation sector is seen to be leading by example.
Basis for the Targets
Two targets are proposed for the power generation and distribution sector:
 10 PJ of electricity derived from grid-connected cogeneration and waste heat 
recovery plant
 Electricity distribution losses below 8%
The first target derives from a relatively conservative assumption regarding the 
extent to which the identified potential may be exploited (equivalent to a capacity of 
about 500 MWe operating at 60% load factor). The second target is based on an 
assumption that internationally acceptable levels of distribution loss (technical plus 
non-technical) can be reached and sustained. 
5.8. Sector-level and economy-wide impacts
In most cases, the impact seen at the sectoral level includes not only the effects of 
the targeted savings but also a range of other factors such as autonomous change, Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
34
and the continuing effects of policy measures that were already in place before the 
current strategy period commenced. The relationship between the sectoral targets 
and the sector-level impacts is explained in more detail in Annex A.
Industry & mining sector: Available data in 2030 is likely to be sufficiently 
disaggregated to allow a detailed decomposition analysis to be conducted on the 
industry & mining sector. The combined effect of the 16% improvement in weighted 
mean specific energy consumption in manufacturing, and the 40 PJ energy saving in 
mining are expected to result in a sector-wide saving of about 15% after the effects 
of structural change between industrial sub-sectors have been allowed for.
Commercial & public sector: It is assumed that the availability of aggregated data 
in 2030 will be similar to that of today, which would preclude anything other than a 
very approximate decomposition analysis to be conducted of the combined 
commercial and public sectors. Assuming the individual targets are met, the overall 
result of a decomposition analysis conducted in 2030 would show a 37% reduction in 
energy consumption attributable to efficiency improvements. This is the weighted 
mean of the separate targets (37% from commercial buildings, 50% from public 
buildings, 20% from municipal services and 30% from municipal vehicle fleets).
Residential sector: A decomposition analysis conducted in 2030 (using shifts in the 
relative size of LSM bands as an analogy for structural changes) would show a 33% 
reduction in sector-wide energy consumption attributable to efficiency improvements.
Transport sector: The detailed data necessary for a decomposition analysis of the 
transport sector is unlikely to be available, so the overall impact of the expected 
energy savings is expressed as a simple reduction in sector-wide energy intensity of 
39%. 
Agriculture sector: The detailed data necessary for a decomposition analysis of the 
agricultural sector is unlikely to be available, so the overall impact of the expected 
energy savings is expressed as a simple reduction in sector-wide energy intensity of 
30%.
Economy-wide impact: This is a weighted mean of the individual sector-level 
impacts described in the preceding sections, which indicates that a decomposition 
analysis conducted in 2030 would show an economy-wide reduction in energy 
consumption of 29% attributable to efficiency improvements.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
35
6. The enabling framework
The enabling framework covers measures and activities that will support the 
achievement of objectives, building a strong institutional basis on which to promote, 
support and monitor energy efficiency. These initiatives are designed to improve the 
professionalization of the sector, grow the knowledge base around energy efficiency, 
as well as gather the information necessary for evidence-based decision-making.
6.1. On-going strategic planning 
The initial formulation of the strategic plan is the first step in a 15-year, continuous
process from 2015 to 2030. The plan will be reviewed every five years to assess the 
progress made towards the targets, the outcomes of the measures, and to make 
adjustments as necessary. The first comprehensive review will take place in 2020 
however annual brief reviews will be undertaken based on an annual progress 
report. The resources to support the strategic plan will need to be secured and 
therefore it may be necessary to review the strategy in light of this. The review 
process will be collaborative and will engage stakeholders across the sectors.
New opportunities and technologies are likely to arise during the 15-year time span 
of this strategy, necessitating flexibility to take advantage of these opportunities. As 
government policy develops, specifically in relation to climate change, the 
harmonisation of policies will also be considered at each five-year review.
6.2. Overcoming market barriers
There are a number of market barriers, including the availability of investment 
financing, misplaced incentives to purchase inefficient appliances, equipment and 
vehicles, and a lack of information. Within each sector, measures have been put 
forward in this Strategy to address the majority of barriers however the 
professionalization of the energy efficiency sector is a measure that cuts across 
sectors and is an enabler to facilitate the uptake of energy efficiency opportunities.
The role of ESCOs in promoting and facilitating energy efficiency projects has 
primarily been limited to functioning as implementing agents for Eskom‟s Integrated 
Demand Management (IDM) programme. However, the potential that ESCOs have 
to support the implementation of energy efficiency extends to undertaking energy 
audits of all processes and activities, delivering on renovation work, bringing in 
capital investment, taking on the investment risk by guaranteeing minimum savings, 
monitoring and verification, facility management, and supply of energy. However, 
current capacity to provide these services is limited, specifically in the industrial, 
transport and agricultural sectors. The ESCO incubator described in Section 5.1 is 
intended to nurture smaller ESCOs to eventually provide comprehensive services.
A cornerstone of achieving this level of service is the professionalization of 
services. This not only means having the technical skills to understand complex 
processes, but also specialised sectoral experience to know the limitations of the 
theory and how to overcome them to deliver effective solutions in practice. 
Accreditation of ESCOs will be developed and promoted in collaboration with the 
South African National Accreditation System (SANAS) and the South African 
Qualifications Authority (SAQA). The accreditation system will allow for progressive Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
36
levels of attainment, allowing for ESCOs to gradually build towards full accreditation, 
based on similar models adopted internationally, such as Singapore and the United 
Arab Emirates. It is expected that by increasing the availability of qualified and 
reliable ESCOs, the services offered will stabilise.
6.3. Knowledge sharing, data collection and performance 
monitoring
Data required for policy-making and monitoring needs to be reliable and timely, 
covering markets, technologies, and efficiency opportunities18, as well as strategy 
performance monitoring data. With respect to the first three information needs, 
innovation hubs will primarily be responsible for producing and sharing this 
information. 
Innovation hubs
There are a number of activities being implemented to develop a knowledge base in 
the energy efficiency field, such as the Energy Resource Centre and the National 
Cleaner Production Centre. The DoE and DST have established an Energy 
Efficiency Demand-Side Management Hub at the University of Pretoria. This concept 
will be taken further and revised to broaden the scope to include sector-specific 
divisions that can engage in activities that are relevant to the specific sectors and 
sub-sectors, thereby increasing the relevance of the innovation hubs across all 
sectors. 
The emphasis of the hubs is to develop knowledge partnerships and test 
technologies and processes in the South African context. The modality of 
implementing the hubs will be defined in collaboration with relevant government 
departments, academia and with relevant sectoral stakeholders, although it is 
recommended that the hosts of the hubs are diverse to test different approaches. 
Issues of confidentiality and anti-competitive information sharing would need to be 
addressed carefully.
The main functions of the hubs are envisaged to be:
 To encourage knowledge transfer by partnering experts and academia with 
sectoral organisations; 
 Under the partnerships, undertake research on technologies and processes to 
understand how international best practices could be applied in the South 
African context;
 Collaborate with sectoral stakeholders to identify specific barriers and 
challenges in achieving optimum energy efficiency that warrant research;
 Identify areas of innovation and to share this information (within the confines 
of confidentiality) across the sector and more broadly;
 Establish a community of practice constituted of sectoral energy stakeholders 
bringing together the creators of knowledge on energy efficiency and the 
users of that knowledge, including local manufacturers of energy efficient 
technologies;
 
18 IEA 25 Recommended Policy Interventions, 2011Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1.1
37
 Where possible, develop demonstration sites and showcases of successful 
technology innovation;
 Collating international and national research on energy efficiency and 
producing synthesis papers to summarise findings on specific themes.
Data collection for performance monitoring
Building on the establishment of the Energy Efficiency Target Monitoring System in 
2014, the importance of data for evidence-based policy making is underlined by the 
current lack of reliable data. Developing data collection and performance monitoring 
systems is an area that will require significant investment of time, expertise and 
infrastructure. The results-based framework detailed in Annex A should form the 
basis for developing the data collection and on-going monitoring systems. Annex D
(Basis for the development of the targets) provides details of the targets, how they 
were derived and defined, and how they will be measured.
The data collection needs should be considered across departments, taking into 
consideration the reporting required for the purposes of the carbon tax, 12L, and 
energy management plans. The DoE will deepen its collaboration with Statistics 
South Africa to incorporate energy consumption patterns and levels as a core 
element in routine data collection exercises. A household energy survey will be 
designed and administered every 3 years to inform the strategy review process. 
6.4. Monitoring compliance, enforcement and evaluating the 
policy measures
The authorities and organisations responsible for implementing the measures within 
this strategy will need to take into consideration the monitoring, enforcement and 
evaluation framework when designing the specific policy measure. One of the main 
challenges of enforcement is ensuring that objectives, processes, and procedures 
are well defined and consistently followed where measures are obligatory. 
The points at which the verification of compliance with or enforcement of 
requirements in accordance with defined regulations will be identified. For example, 
the enforcement of regulations on the importing of equipment of certain standards 
would take place at the port of entry and through routine spot checks of equipment 
suppliers. In the case of building regulations, verification of compliance is currently 
undertaken during the planning phase, without any further inspection of the actual 
construction. As with other standards and regulations, spot checks by an 
independent body may prove effective to ensure that the expected savings are 
realised.Post-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1
38
7. The way forwardThe following section provides an overview of the implementation plan for the first five years, the details of which are provided in 
Annex E.
Reference no.
Measure Timelines
Year 1
2016-2017
Year 2
2017-2018
Year 3
2018-2019
Year 4
2019-2020
Year 5
2020-2021
PUBLIC SECTORP1.1 The introduction of mandatory EPC certificates in all rented 
properties and publicly accessible buildings
P1.2 Develop the public sector awareness raising campaign to 
facilitate the “leading by example” approach
P1.3 Introduce standards and labelling relevant for public sector 
appliances and equipment
P1.4 Announce a 15-year trajectory for the successive tightening 
of the energy performance component of building standardsand successively tighten standards
P1.5 Roll-out of the provision of energy and activity data to the 
public sector
MUNICIPAL SECTORP2.1 Develop municipal energy efficiency strategiesP2.2 Support the implementation of energy savings measures RESIDENTIAL SECTORR1 Announce a 15-year trajectory for the successive tightening 
of minimum energy performance standards for household appliances and successively tighten standards
R2 Develop a strongly branded energy performance 
certification mark for household appliances (modelled on the „Energy Star‟ brand), in addition to the planned EE labels.
R3 Announce a 15-year trajectory for the successive tightening 
of the energy performance component of building standards for residential buildings and successively tighten standardsPost-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1
39
Ref no. Measure Timelines
Year 1
2016-2017
Year 2
2017-2018
Year 3
2018-2019
Year 4
2019-2020
Year 5
2020-2021
R4 Build on the existing awareness-raising activities targeting 
households and the school curriculum
R5 Roll-out of the provision of energy and activity data from the 
residential sector
R6 Support technology innovation and dissemination of energy 
efficient cookstove technologies
COMMERCIAL SECTORC1 The introduction of mandatory EPC certificates in all rented 
properties and publicly accessible buildings.
C2 Revision of 12L to ensure it provides an incentive to commercial 
property owners
C3 Introduce standards and labelling relevant for commercial sector 
appliances and equipment
C4 Roll-out of the provision of energy and activity data from the 
commercial sector
INDUSTRIAL SECTORI1 Adjustment of the 12L tax incentive schemeI2 Minimum energy performance standards for motors and motordriven systemsI3 Provision of targeted support and advice on energy efficiency to 
enterprises 
I4 Incentivise enterprises to introduce EnMS and achieve 
ISO50001 certification standards
I5 Roll-out of the provision of energy and production data from the 
manufacturing sub-sector
I6 Develop standardised tools for voluntary reporting of energy 
savings from initiatives in the mining sector
I7 Creation of technology/ learning hubs for energy efficiencyPost-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1
40
Ref no.
Measure Timelines
Year 1
2016-2017
Year 2
2017-2018
Year 3
2018-2019
Year 4
2019-2020
Year 5
2020-2021
AGRICULTURE SECTORA1 Explore the potential for savings in agricultural vehicle use, and 
develop appropriate awareness-raising material
A2 Development of targeted awareness-raising and training material 
on potential savings in motor-driven systems
A3 Provide direct grants to small farmers / smallholders for all or part 
of the cost of interventions
TRANSPORT SECTORT1 Develop fuel efficiency standards for light and heavy vehicles to 
improve the overall efficiency of the vehicle stock 
T2 Improve systems for ensuring road worthiness T3 Roll-out of the provision of energy and activity data from the 
transport sector
PRODUCTION AND DISTRIBUTION SECTORG1 Developing the enabling framework for cogeneration and 
trigeneration 
G2 Expansion of internal efficiency programmes for producersENABLING FRAMEWORKE1 Ongoing strategic planningE2 Overcoming market barriersE3 Knowledge sharing, data collection and performance monitoringE4 Monitoring compliance, enforcement and evaluating policy 
measuresPost-2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy Draft v1
41