File Name: ZAF-CPD-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: South Africa
Country Code: ZAF
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 1 – 5 June 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2025
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
27 May 2020
Original: English
2007417X (E) 280720
Annual session 2020
1 – 5 June 2020, New York
Item 9 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for South Africa 
(June 2020-2025)
Contents
Page
I. Programme rationale .................................................................................................... 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management.................................................................................... 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for South Africa (June 2020-2025) 9I. Programme rationale
1. Apartheid left South Africa with entrenched structural and systemic divides that perpetuate a dual 
economy and the triple development challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality.
Unemployment has worsened, reaching a high of 29.1 per cent by December 2019, with rates of 41 
per cent for youth (15-34 years) and 31.3 per cent for women, compared to 27.1 per cent for men. 
High unemployment exacerbates the challenges of addressing poverty and income inequality. 
2. Forty per cent of the population live below the national lower poverty line of 647 rand1 per month. 
Poverty is highest among blacks, affecting mostly the less educated, female-headed households and 
those living in rural, peri-urban and township areas. Inequality remains high, with a small 
improvement of the Gini coefficient from 0.70 (2006) to 0.68 (2016). The economy is in recession 
with an average economic growth rate below 2 per cent for the past decade, largely attributable to 
drought and declines in mining and manufacturing as a result of low business competitiveness, 
especially for small businesses. Climate warming is a significant risk to the country’s development 
and undermines achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
2
3. The Human Development Index (HDI) increased from 0.699 (2017) to 0.705 (2018), mainly due 
to improvements in access to education and some health services. When adjusted for inequality, the 
HDI fell to 0.463, reflecting a 34.4 per cent loss. The Gender inequality Index of 0.422 shows a critical 
contributor to overall inequalities. Entrenched gender practices breed discrimination and a normalized 
culture of gender-based violence. On governance, the country’s score on the Transparency 
International Corruption Perceptions Index deteriorated from 0.495 (1997) to 0.430 (2018), dogged 
by allegations of patronage, corruption and state capture. 
4. In attaining the Sustainable Development Goals, South Africa will harness its resources, gather 
lessons learned and promote inclusive growth. The Government has made impressive progress on
universal primary education, a comprehensive social protection programme covering over 17 million 
people, promoting gender equality with female representation in the legislatures of 44 per cent3and 
enacting a comprehensive anti-retroviral therapy programme, which reduced the rate of mother-tochild transmission of HIV to less than 1 per cent. 
5. The 1996 Constitution diversified access to opportunities for all races, genders and demographic
groups and provided for the private sector as an enabler to accelerate transformative and inclusive 
development. Notwithstanding, the 2020 Common Country Analysis (CCA) reveals that persistent 
development challenges remain due to structural and spatial divides, over-concentration of the 
economy on mining, agriculture, finance and real estate, existence of monopolies, corruption and 
weakening of state institutions. Concerns remain on social protection coverage, sustainability, 
inefficiencies in targeting the most vulnerable and inclusion of the informal sector.
6. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2020-2025, 
developed in partnership with the Government, will contribute to addressing these multidimensional
challenges. It is aligned to the Government’s Medium-Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) 2020-2025
and focuses on four of its seven priorities: transform the economy to serve the people; advance social 
transformation; strengthen governance and public institutions; and South Africa for a better Africa and 
world.
7. The UNSDCF focuses on four strategic priorities as entry nodes for an effective, relevant and 
sustainable contribution to accelerating the Sustainable Development Goals in South Africa: inclusive, 
just and sustainable economic growth; human capital and social transformation; effective, efficient 
and transformative governance; and climate resilience and sustainable natural resource management.
A fifth priority, South Africa and a better world, is mainstreamed across the four priorities: 
8. These strategic priorities are further synthesized into nine UNSDCF outcomes; UNDP will 
contribute principally to three of these, harnessing its comparative advantages in governance and 
1 United States dollar equivalence of $35.83 as at 12 April 2020.
2 https://www.exploratorium.edu/climate/looking-ahead#DatasetHowMuchWarmer?
3 Women's Charter Review https://www
parliamentgovza/project-event-details/48inclusive growth, where it is as the lead agency, in monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and its integrator 
role to ensure that those who are most likely to be left behind – youth, women, people with disabilities 
and vulnerable communities – are given voice, are resilient, have access to opportunities and are 
integrated in development processes. 
9. As the United Nations interlocutor with Statistics South Africa, UNDP will reinforce capacities
for collection and analysis of disaggregated data, including on land management and governance, to 
inform policy formulation and monitor implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. The 
experience, effectiveness and efficiency in climate change adaptation and clean and sustainable energy 
solutions garnered by UNDP will be complemented with resources of the Regional Service Centre and 
headquarters to support the country in addressing climate and energy challenges. UNDP will embrace
environmental governance while promoting opportunities for employment generation. 
10. UNDP will leverage its comparative advantage in the area of governance to position the United 
Nations as the main partner of choice in working with the Government on strengthening public 
institutions, including election management bodies, the Public Service Commission, parliament and 
civil society organizations (CSOs) with a focus on fighting corruption and supporting inclusive 
participation and social cohesion. UNDP will work with the Sustainable Development Goal Finance 
Hub, African Development Bank, European Union, International Monetary Fund and other partners 
to identify opportunities, including with the private sector, to support scaling-up of investments
towards implementation of the Goals and catalysing inclusive growth.
11. The key success factors of the country programme 2013-2020 were its increased emphasis on 
interventions at the local level and institutional strengthening. UNDP broadened and extended 
partnershipsto the provincial level in Limpopo, Eastern Cape, Kwa Zulu Natal and Gauteng provinces,
focusing on the most deprived. Vulnerable communities in fire-prone agricultural landscapes were 
fortified through climate disaster response and management approaches; inclusive financing for 
women entrepreneurs was introduced; and the capacities of women judges were strengthened to fight 
gender-based violence and femicide.
12. UNDP launched the Youth by the Youth Programme, linking entrepreneurs to markets and banks,
and partnered with Gauteng Province on small business development and on social protection to 
provide options on social grants to the informal sector. UNDP supported KwaZulu-Natal and Limpopo 
provinces on ethical leadership development, citizen participation in the electoral process and health 
systems strengthening, and supported the South African National AIDS Council to address stigma and 
discrimination through human rights-based approaches. 
13. UNDP strengthened the platform for regional water security on the critical Orange-Senqu Basin;
supported the preparation of the Minimum Wage Bill benefiting 6 million people, of whom at least 26
per cent are women;
4
and expanded the scope for renewable energy uptake through policy reform, 
wind turbine refurbishment and youth-centred training of wind energy technicians (at least 40 per cent
women). UNDP also supported the preparation of the National Wind Atlas and fostered legally 
enforceable standards and regulations for energy-efficient appliances. 
14. To strengthen South-South cooperation, South Africa contributed to relief efforts in the United 
Republic of Tanzania for the rehabilitation of critical infrastructure following the 2016 Kagera 
earthquake. The uptake of South-South cooperation was slow in the country programme 2013-2020, 
and UNDP will explore and buttress this area in the new country programme.
15. Overall, the terminal evaluation of the United Nations Strategic Cooperation Framework 
(UNSCF) (2017)5lauded its good alignment to national priorities but bemoaned poorly defined 
indicators. It also noted increasing demand for technical expertise in the areas of health, labour, 
environment and social protection. Both the UNSCF evaluation and CCA (2017) recommended 
Delivering as One in the provision of timely, flexible and high-quality assistance in an upper-middleincome country context. The evaluation of the previous UNDP country programme acknowledged that 
4 Quarterly Labour Force Survey February 2020.
5 The previous UNSCF was originally for the period 2013-2017, as was the UNDP country programme. The programme period was extended at the 
request of the Government and United Nations Country TeamUNDP was in consonance with the country’s development priorities as it drew from the UNSCF, the 
MTSF 2014-2019 and the UNDP Strategic Plans, 2014-2017 and 2018-2021. The evaluation also 
found that UNDP is thinly spread, needed to improve on reconciling the localization of global issues 
and responding to local needs, and that its monitoring and reporting system should capture peoplecentred impact. 
16. Additional lessons learned from stakeholder consultations include the need to improve 
communication, coordination and downstream interventions and to diversify partnerships. The report 
of the Secretary-General on development cooperation with middle-income countries (2017)6
accentuated the UNDP partnership with the Government, which has been amplified by the need for 
collaborative efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Africa Union 
Agenda 2063. In the 2020-2025 country programme, UNDP is driven by its comparative advantage, 
lessons learned and need to be focused, impactful, sustainable and transformative. 
17. This country programme will be different as it prioritizes Delivering as One and supporting the 
Government in addressing the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the short term, while in 
the long-term instituting measures to build resilience, foster reintegration and stop stigma and
discrimination. Fundamentally, the country programme will avoid being thinly spread by contributing 
to only three UNSDCF outcomes.It will focus on empowerment of youth and women as a pathway to 
reducing poverty and inequalities and will utilize innovation in finding local solutions to accelerate 
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
18. UNDP will proactively court the private sector and foundations for Goal-related impact 
investments and will leverage the experiences of the Global Policy Network, Regional Service Centre 
for Africa, Sustainable Development Goal Finance Hub and headquarters. There will be a greater drive 
for evidence-based research and collaborations with think tanks to inform policy, planning and 
monitoring for sustainable human development. UNDP will build on its integrator role and previous 
work of coordinating the Government, United Nations and civil society around the Sustainable 
Development Goals.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
19. The anchor of the UNDP country programme 2020-2025 is youth and women’s empowerment
and employment, as the bedrock for reducing poverty and inequality in South Africa. The country 
programme is aligned to three of the nine UNSDCF outcomes, on equitable social and economic 
opportunities, participation in decision-making and access to justice, and resilience to climate change.
It implements the six signature solutions of the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021 and prioritizes five 
of the six impact areas7 of the UNDP regional offer (2020-2021), including the associated foundational 
enablers.
8
20. The country programme will be operationalized through three interrelated portfolios, with critical
emphasis on leaving no one behind and achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
Considering that the impacts of COVID-19 may outlast the period of this country programme, the 
portfolios, especially inclusive and sustainable growth, will mainstream the short- and medium-term 
responses to the pandemic as well as the long-term socioeconomic and governance interventions that 
will help sustain existing development gains and stimulate full recovery.
6 A/72/329
7 The programme will prioritize natural resource governance, structural transformation, youth and women employment and empowerment, climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, and affordable and sustainable energy.
8 Governance of things; digital transformation; sustainable/innovative financing; strategic communications and partnerships; South-South cooperation; and 
development intelligencePortfolio 1. Inclusive, just and sustainable economic growth
21. People must be the means and end of economic growth. This requires inclusive and sustainable 
economic growth that enables all South Africans, particularly women, youth, people with disabilities 
and other marginalized groups, to access socioeconomic opportunities. This will be achieved by 
developing value chains in the circular economy that can create new jobs and enterprises and are riskinformed and environmentally sustainable. 
22. Efforts will focus on digital skills development and entrepreneurship; increased access to land for 
people living in rural areas and improved small-scale agriculture; and strengthening social protection 
for the most vulnerable groupsin society, including targeted social insurance for women9and informal 
sector workers.
10 Opportunities presented by the fourth industrial revolution will be leveraged by 
addressing the skills mismatch and enterprise development services, preparing the workforce for a 
labour transition to renewable energy. Intragovernmental coordination with the private sector will be 
critical to creating job opportunities.
23. UNDP will provide technical assistance on legal and policy research, social dialogue and human 
development; and promote the use of evidence-based information and beneficiation schemes to 
support the Government in decisively addressing the fractured land administration and management 
system. UNDP will advocate for inclusive innovation within national strategies, science and 
innovation policies and research and development programmes. It will support participation of lowincome communities as producers and consumers of innovation within business and industry value 
chains and ensure that small and micro-enterprises are able to participate in economic activities.
Portfolio 2. Effective, efficient and transformative governance
24. The public service remains challenged in discharging its duties transparently, accountably and 
effectively.
11 The programme priorities in transformative governance will strengthen service delivery 
centred on the Sustainable Development Goals, thereby enabling a capable developmental State and 
improving awareness of governance mechanisms. Inclusive citizen participation through dialogue 
platforms, gender mainstreaming and human rights-based approaches, coupled with civic education 
programmes, are considered important vehicles to achieve this end. 
25. UNDP will work jointly with United Nations agencies in coordinated structures to strengthen 
national and subnational capacities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic with a focus on the most 
vulnerable. Promoting ethical leadership, anchored on preventing and control of state capture and 
corruption and promotion of professionalism and service compacts, will be prioritized. To mitigate the 
deepening social fractures caused by increasing gender-based violence and femicide and attacks on 
foreign nationals or xenophobia, UNDP will prioritize building social cohesion among all 
stakeholders, reducing stigma towards those affected by HIV/AIDS, COVID-19 and tuberculosis,
grounded on human rights-based approaches and improved evidence.
26. Enhancing the capacities of oversight institutions, including support to electoral management 
bodies to promote innovations and digitalization to enhance confidence in the electoral process, are 
immediate levers for the 2021 local government elections and 2024 provincial and national elections. 
Effective governance and accountability systems for financing the Sustainable Development Goals
will be strengthened. UNDP will partner with the Public Service Commission and the National 
Treasury to build capacity for gender-responsive budgeting; and with the private sector by piloting the 
Gender Equality Seal. In the spirit of the United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy, UNDP will
prioritize disability into UNDP work and partner with relevant departments.
9 Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation and UNDP, Policy Options for Extending Social Protection to Informal Workers in South Africa, 
2018. 
10 UNDP Regional Service Centre for Africa, Extension of Social Protection to the Informal Economy: Assessing extension of Social Protection to Informal 
Workers in Africa, February 2020.
11 Government of South Africa
Towards a 25-year review: 1994-201927. Equally critical is strengthening policy formulation, planning, budgeting and implementation and 
enhancing M&E capacity across all tiers of government. UNDP will promote knowledge-sharing 
between South African public service institutions and their counterparts from the South and the North.
Portfolio 3. Climate resilience and sustainably managed natural resources
28. Adverse weather events, water scarcity and electricity outages highlight the country’s 
vulnerability to the effects of climate change, resulting in high adaptation costs and unprecedented 
transitions in the development process.
12 UNDP will support government efforts to mitigate 
fragmented and uncoordinated approaches against the backdrop of some important multilateral 
agreements and engage the private sector to enable partnerships. 
29. Energy security can be greatly enhanced by scaling up renewable energy technologies (e.g., solar 
and wind) and energy-efficient solutions to accelerate uptake and partnerships. Supporting 
coordination with neighbouring countries by leveraging transboundary water sources will improve 
water security by harnessing nature-based solutions in key basin areas in the Southern African 
Development Community region. This will advance regional solidarity in implementing joint 
agreements on integrated water resources management, especially land management, water quality 
monitoring, resource access, distribution mechanisms and infrastructure.
13
30. The management and sustainable use of natural resources, including land reform, will contribute 
to inclusive and sustainable economic growth through nature-based enterprise development. UNDP 
will harness the country’s untapped bioeconomy,
14 a rich potential for innovation to accelerate 
enterprise development and innovation.
Strategic partnerships
31. The operational strategy is to include women, youth and persons with disabilities in the 
implementation of the three interlinked portfolios to reduce poverty and inequality and create 
employment opportunities using whole-of-society approaches and focusing on local sustainable 
development and South-South and triangular cooperation. UNDP will continue to leverage on its 
global presence and partnerships with bilateral and other multilateral institutions to facilitate SouthSouth and triangular cooperation through exchange of good practices and training. Partnerships will 
be formed with the horizontal and vertical spheres of government.
32. Public agencies responsible for oversight, including the Independent Electoral Commission, 
Public Service Commission and the South African National Energy Development Institute, will be 
engaged to promote harmonized approaches and explore opportunities for government financing/cost
sharing. UNDP will form strategic partnerships with think tanks for policy-oriented thought 
leadership, for instance on the socioeconomic impact of COVID-19, national human development 
reports and reports on the Sustainable Development Goals.
33. The programme will engage CSOs using policy dialogue platforms and skills development. For
bilateral and multilateral partners and the private sector, the focus will be on activating the Business 
Call for Action and Global Compact by encouraging impact investment in Sustainable Development 
Goal-oriented businesses using business incubators and innovation in areas such as value chain 
development and climate change adaptation. Partnerships with international financial institutions will 
be reinforced to leverage technical expertise. 
34. Resource mobilization, including investment crowd financing platforms, will be proactively 
sought for Sustainable Development Goal impact investments. UNDP will undertake joint 
programming with United Nations agencies and multilateral partners. The Accelerator Lab will be a
platform for identification of innovative solutions to problems that affect society, promoting use of 
grass-roots innovation and digital technology across the programmatic areas. Given the country’s 
aspiration for a better Africa and world, UNDP will support South Africa on cross-border initiatives
12 National Planning Commission, National Development Plan 2030, Chapter 5, Environmental Sustainability: An Equitable Transition to a Low-Carbon 
Economy, 2012.
13 River Basin Authorities with jurisdiction over the Orange-Senqu Basin and the Limpopo River Basin respectively.
14 Department of Environmental Affairs, National Biodiversity Economy Strategy, 2016.and South-South and triangular cooperation to promote transformative development exchanges in line 
with the outcome of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation. 
III. Programme and risk management
35. Successful implementation of the programme is premised on strong ownership by the 
Government, partners and target groups. One of the risk management strategies is the periodic review 
of the capacities of partners and staff to implement the programme, with mitigation actions.
36. Critical operational risks include compliance and oversight control, parallel initiatives rather than 
integrated approaches, lack of political will for innovative approaches, limited space for resource 
mobilization given the country’s upper-middle-income status and patriarchal and cultural norms. 
These will be mitigated through brokering strategic partnerships, advocacy, knowledge-sharing and 
use of the UNDP risk management tools and system, making partners more aware of them and 
enabling responsiveness. 
37. The COVID-19 pandemic has shown the associated risks in programme implementation, calling 
for regular evaluation of such risks. It is too early to determine the effects of COVID-19 on poverty 
and overall development in South Africa, but the related risks will be closely monitored. UNDP will 
be adaptive in responding robustly to COVID-19 through reprogramming, reprioritizing and 
mobilizing new resources, as relevant.
38. In line with the United Nations Country Team Business Continuity Plan, UNDP will utilize the 
existing Risk Management Committee and national and subnational multisectoral response 
coordination mechanisms as key avenues for mitigating programme and project risks. Key threats to 
the achievement of the programme’s objectives are stagnant economic growth; local government 
elections (2021) and provincial elections (2024); continued energy crises; climate-induced floods and 
droughts; sporadic service delivery protests; xenophobic attacks and rising incidence of sexual and 
gender-based violence that threaten social cohesion; and the evolving COVID-19 and other potential 
pandemics. 
39. Notwithstanding these threats, opportunities exist such as the country’s relatively good 
infrastructure, young and educated population, coverage and use of the fourth industrial revolution 
and the Government’s positioning of South Africa as the investment hub in Africa. UNDP will 
strengthen existing United Nations system-wide and programme governance mechanisms to enhance 
government and stakeholder engagement under the UNSDCF 2020-2025.
40. To ensure effective programme management, UNDP will convene quarterly stakeholder and 
portfolio steering committee meetings, including citizen-led consultations to garner their views and
promote transparency and trust. Periodic15 performance reviews,
16 site visits and innovative digitalenabled monitoring will support effective and timely management of exposure to risk and harnessing 
of opportunities. Regarding private sector partnerships, the corporate risk management approach, due 
diligence policy and procedures will be referenced. All eligible initiatives will undergo rigorous 
screening for quality assurance and social and environment standards.
41. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and serves 
as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources 
assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarter levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme 
and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework.
42. The programme will be nationally executed but will accommodate direct execution for part or all 
of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers 
(HACT) will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations agencies to manage financial 
15 Annual, midterm and end-of-cycle.
16 Audits
evaluations and corporate oversight missionsrisks. Cost definitions and classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be 
charged to the concerned projects.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
43. UNDP will develop an integrated M&E plan anchored on results-based management principles 
to track progress of programme priorities. This will feed into United Nations-wide reporting platforms 
for shared results. The M&E framework will serve as a key measuring instrument to facilitate 
continuous assessment and reporting. UNDP will ensure that data disaggregation becomes integral to 
programme design, implementation and monitoring of impacts on target groups, including use of the 
UNDP gender and other markers. Regular gender analysis will help UNDP to monitor expenditure
and improve planning and decision-making on gender marker results. In line with Leave No One 
Behind, the country programme data will be disaggregated to ensure that services are provided to all 
priority beneficiary groups.
44. UNDP will continue to build capacities to undertake regular monitoring of field activities and 
provide quality assurance in line with the results framework and project quality assurance guidelines. 
Midterm and final evaluations will be an integral part of programme and project management to ensure 
that lessons learned and best practices are used to improve effectiveness and efficiency. UNDP will 
continue to lead implementation of the HACT framework to ensure that fiduciary risk management, 
quality assurance and programme monitoring activities are undertaken regularly to promote 
efficiencies in United Nations procurement and resource management. 
45. At least 5 per cent of each project budget will be charged to support M&E and communication 
functions and strengthen staffing. Monitoring and evaluation will be undertaken in partnership with 
the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation National Planning Commission and Statistics 
South Africa. UNDP will strengthen the capacities of national and subnational authorities to generate 
and use data for improved policy development and monitoring of the Sustainable Development Goals
hosting Joint Africa M&E Indaba and trainings . UNDP will systematically apply direct project costs 
to reflect the costs incurred with project management support to ensure financial sustainability. The 
programme evaluation plan will include midterm and terminal evaluations which will feed into the 
UNSDCF evaluation.
46. Partnering with think tanks, UNDP will conduct research on issues of interest to inform quality 
programming and decision-making. The M&E and Knowledge Management Units will work together 
to implement an integrated knowledge management. A series of reports on human development, 
inequalities and status of the Sustainable Development Goals will be produced for national, provincial 
and municipal governments. UNDP will continue to implement its partnership and communications 
strategy to communicate its contribution to development results to stakeholders, target groups and 
partners in a transparent manner, using innovative and user-friendly social media tools.Annex. Results and resources framework for South Africa (June 2020-2025)
NATIONAL GOAL: Inclusive, just and sustainable economic growth
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2025, all people in South Africa particularly women, youth and other marginalized groups have access to equitable social and economic 
opportunities
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 - Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS (indicators, baselines targets)
MAJOR PARTNERS/ 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME (in 
thousands of $)
I: 1.1.1. % below the international 
poverty rate of $1.9 B: 33.8% (2010) T: 
18.8%.
Source: Living Conditions Survey
Social Grants Statistics: Department 
of Social Development (DSD);
General Household Surveys; 
Agriculture Census; Food Security 
in South Africa; HDR
Evaluation reports including 
generated by Department of 
Planning, Monitoring and 
Evaluation (DPME);
Frequency: Annually
Responsibility: Department of 
Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural 
Development (DALRRD),
Department of Economic 
Development (DED), Statistics 
South Africa (StatsSA); UNDP
Output 1.1: Social protection programme expanded to include 
informal workers especially women as part of social security 
reforms. 
I: 1.1.1. % increase in coverage for women especially informal and 
domestic workers for policy options on social insurance/protection.
B: 21% T: 42%
I: 1.1.2. % of social transfer payment to target vulnerable groups 
(especially rural women) not currently covered 
B: 0 T: 45%
DSD; Department of 
Employment and Labour
National Planning Commission 
(NPC); DPME, Statistics South 
Africa; Gauteng DED;
United Nations agencies, 
Informal workers’
organizations,
Provincial departments of land, 
agriculture, environment and 
rural development; 
National Youth Development 
Agency.
DALRRD, GEF, GCF;
Provincial and municipal 
departments
Department of Small Business 
Development; 
Small Enterprise Development 
Agency; 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology,
Stanford University, 
technical, and vocational 
education and training 
institutions, 
Development Bank of Southern 
Africa, 
Regular
resources: 
1 085
Other resources: 
7 000
I: 1.2.1. % of land transfer to the landless 
by 2024
B: 9%: T: 15%
Output 1.2: Capacities of key national institutions enhanced to
design and implement inclusive17 and integrated national 
policies and programmes on equitable land reform and local 
sustainable development 
I: 1.2.1. # of gender-responsive and innovative policies, 
programmes and solutions developed and implemented at national 
and subnational levels to address land ownership inequality, 
improved livelihoods and increase access to land by the rural poor, 
esp. women and youth
B: 0 T: 4 
I: 1.2.2. Proportion of people at the local level benefiting from 
solutions developed to address land ownership disaggregated by 
women and youth
B: 0 T: 75% (50% women; 20% persons with disabilities)
I: 1.2.2. HDI
B: 0.705 (2019) T: > 0.750
I: 1.3.1. Multidimensional poverty rates 
disaggregated by sex, location, age, 
Source: SDGs Reports, HDRs 
Demographic and Health Survey 
Output 1.3. institutional capacities at national and subnational 
levels improved to plan innovative delivery and accelerate 
17 In partnership with Government to address land ownership inequality
increase access to land for people living in rural areasparticularly women and youthto improve their livelihood and food securityincome, gender, age, race, ethnicity, 
migratory status and location
B: 0.032 (2018) T: > 0.016 
I: 1.3.2. Gini coefficient
B: 0.68 (2019) T: ≤0.65
I: 1.3.3. Total spending on essential 
services as a % of total government 
expenditure. 
B: 20%; T: ≥ 25% [Southern African 
Development Community/African 
Union Protocol]
(DHS), Labour Participation 
Surveys, Small Business Institute; 
Small Enterprise Development 
Agency; World Economic Forum 
Competitiveness Index
Frequency: Annual/Biennial 
Responsibility: Department of Small 
Business Development, StatsSA
redress of multidimensional poverty, unemployment and 
inequalities 
I:1.3.1. Existence of integrated policies and strategies to reduce the 
multidimensional poverty 
B: No T: Yes 
I. 13.2: # of networking, exchanges platforms between private and 
public sectors on business development to address inefficient labour 
market information system, including digital skills created: 
B: 0 T: 10
I. 1.3.3: # of national and subnational public institutions with datainformed policies and plans in place to strengthen decision-making, 
social cohesion and prevent risk of conflict
B: 0 T: National 2; Subnational 9
Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research, 
NGOs/CSOs, 
Private sector; 
Microsoft,
Commodity organizations
I: 1.4.1. Unemployment rate
B: 29% National
 Women: 31.3%
 Male: 27.1% (Male) 
 Youth: 56.4% (Youth)
T: ≤ 21 for women and men 
≤ 35 for youths
Output 1.4: Comprehensive business, youth entrepreneurship 
and supplier development programme initiated for rural and 
off-farm enterprises with potential to enhance quality of 
business development services18 for micro-, small and mediumsized enterprises (MSMEs) and value chains
I: 1.4.1. # and type of MSMEs owned by youth and women that 
transition beyond stabilization to the growth stage as a result of 
business development services
B: 0 T: 100 (Youth-owned 50, Women-owned 50)
I: 1.4.2. # of new youth and women-led/owned rural and off-farm 
enterprises benefiting from business development support.
B: 0 T: 100 (Youth-led/owned 50, Women-led/owned 50)
I: 1.4.3. # of youth including those in the youth networks provided 
with digital skills to improve their employability, disaggregated by 
gender, geographic areas
B: 0 T: 250 (40% women-led, 40% male-led, 20% led by persons 
with disabilities; 60% Urban; 40% Rural) 
I: 1.4.4. # of MSMEs utilizing supplier development platforms for 
inclusive and sustainable value chains.
B: 0 T: 20
I: 1.4.5. # of smallholders’ cooperatives [focusing on women and 
youth] supported to access markets and value chains 
B: 195 T: 350
18 Technical training
access to fundingdigitalization and technology transfer and marketsNATIONAL GOAL: Effective, efficient and transformative governance
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2025, women and marginalized groups are able to participate meaningfully in decision making processes and access justice
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
I:2.2.1. Voter turnout 
disaggregated by sex, age and
excluded groups
B: 65.99%, 57% women, 43% 
male, 38% under 35% 
T: Above national average of > 
70%, 60% females, 50% under 35s
I: 2.2.2. % of seats held by women 
in national parliaments and local 
governments
B: 46% women representation;
T: At least 50% women
Source: Sectoral report and 
studies, LCS ; DHS, Census 
Reports. Commissioned 
Studies; HDRs, CSOs, 
Parliamentary Reports, 
Aggregate Indices,
19State of the 
Nation Address, 
Frequency: Annual/biennial
Responsibility: StatsSA
Output 2.1: Capacities developed across Government 
to integrate the 2030 Agenda, Paris Agreement and 
other international agreements in development plans 
and budgets, and to analyse progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals, using innovative and 
data-driven solutions (SP Output 1.1.1)
I. 2.1.1: # of new collaborative knowledge products 
produced on priority Goals, COVID-19 and South-South 
initiatives. 
B: 0 T: 5, incl. national human development report
I. 2.1.2: # of innovative funding solutions for the 
advancement of Sustainable Development Goals20
B: TBC T: 4 
Government departments 
including DPME, 
StatsSA ; 
Public Service Commission 
(PSC), NPC, think tanks, 
United Nations agencies, 
CSOs, academia, treaty 
bodies.
Regular
resources: 
1 086
Other 
resources: 14
000
Source: Portfolio Committee/ 
Parliamentary Reports
Frequency: Quarterly
Responsibility:
Independent Electoral 
Commission (IEC), UNDP
Output 2.2.: Constitution-making, electoral and 
parliamentary processes and institutions strengthened 
to promote inclusion, transparency and accountability
I: 2.2.1. # of electoral management bodies with 
strengthened capacity to conduct inclusive and credible 
elections
B: 1 T: 6
I: 2.2.2. Increase in women's participation in the 
democratic electoral process: 
(a) Proportion of women on the voter registry; 
(b) Proportion of women in local councils, provincial and 
national 
 legislatures
(a) B: 52% T: 55%
(b) B: 41% T: 50%
I: 2.2.3. # of Constitution-making bodies with 
mechanisms for civic engagement, including the 
participation of women and other marginalized groups
B: 4 T: 10
IEC, 
African Union, 
Department of Home 
Affairs
Speakers Forum
Multi-Party Women’s
Caucus
19 Mo Ibrahim, Ease of Doing Business, Corruption Index, Multidimensional Poverty Index, Gender Inequality Index, etc.
20 Data sources may identify needs
markets and direction for inclusive innovation 
I: 2.2.4. # of gender-responsive innovations introduced in 
civic education, voting processes and reporting, 
B: 0 T: 5 
I: 2.3.1. % of population satisfied 
with their last experience with 
public services
B: 63%21 T: 20% increase
I: 2.3.2. % of population who 
believe decision-making is 
inclusive and responsive, by sex, 
age, and disability 
B: 71%22 T: At least 20% increase
I: 2.3.3. Public Sector 
Accountability & Transparency 
(0-100)
B: 77.7 (2018) T: >85%
Source: Status Reports on 
Climate Change, HDRs , 
Disaster Risk 
Management/DRR Reports, 
Mo Ibrahim Index
Frequency: Annual/Biennial
Responsibility: UNDP
Output 2.3. Capacities of core government institutions 
at the national and subnational levels improved to plan 
for inclusive and innovative delivery of high-quality 
interventions and services to deepen democracy
I: 2.3.1. # of locally developed innovations/solutions 
identified and tested towards enhancing public services 
delivery, reaching young people, women and persons with 
disabilities
B: 0 T: 3
I: 2.3.2. # of adopted legal, policy and institutional reforms 
to remove structural barriers to women’s empowerment 
(SP2.6.1.1)
B: 3 Target: 10 
I: 2.3.3. Level of compliance by government departments 
to standard public administration ethical practices and 
accountability (rating scale: 1=low (25%) compliance; 2 = 
Moderate (50%) compliance; 3 = High (>75%) 
compliance
B: 60% T: 75%
I: 2.3.4. # of public sector/departments with genderresponsive budgeting systems in place
B: 0 T: 10
I: 2.3.5. # of private sector that implemented Gender 
Equality Seal
B: 0 T: 10
I:2.3.6 Persons with disability engaged to integrate 
disability into UNDP’s programmes 
B: 0 T:1
Department of Women, 
Youth and Persons with 
Disabilities, DPME,
StatsSA, NPC, 
Public Service 
Commission, Department 
of Higher Education, 
Science and Technology
Parliament 
Auditor General 
United Nations agencies
National, provincial and 
municipal authorities and 
departments; 
Chapter 9 Institutions, 
IEC, 
Commission for Gender 
Equality; 
Department of Women, 
Youth and Persons with 
Disability; DSD, 
I: 2.4.1. % of ever-partnered CSOs
women and girls aged 15 years and 
Source: LCS: Social Grants 
Statistics: DSD, HDRs, Gender 
Output 2.4: Policy frameworks and institutional 
mechanisms enabled at national and subnational levels 
21 Mo Ibrahim Index: Public Management Score http://iiag.online/
22 Mo Ibrahim Index: Rights & Participation Score http://iiag
online/older subjected to physical, sexual 
or psychological violence by a 
current or former intimate partner 
in the previous 12 months, by form 
of violence and age
B: 23%23 T: halve to 11.5%
I: 2.4.2. Mo Ibrahim Governance 
Index by Gender Score
Overall: B: 68/100 (2018) T: 
>85%
Gender: B: 71/100 (2018) T: 
>85%
I: 2.2.9. Gender Inequality Index
B: 0.389 (2017) T: < 0.200
and HIV Reports, SDG reports, 
Mo Ibrahim Governance Index, 
Transparency International 
Corruption Perceptions Index, 
Special Perceptions Surveys
Frequency: Annual/Biennial 
Responsibility: StatsSA
for the peaceful management of emerging and 
recurring conflicts, tensions and rising levels of genderbased violence and femicide.
I: 2.4.1. Frameworks in place to prevent and respond to 
sexual and disabilities and gender-based violence .
(a) Multisectoral policy and legislation, 
B: 1 T: 3
(b) Multisectoral services including justice and security, 
B: 1 T: 3 
(c) Platforms for raising awareness and social mobilization
B: No T: Yes
NATIONAL GOAL: Climate resilience and sustainably managed natural resources
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: By 2025, South Africa is on a just transition to a low-carbon society and vulnerable & marginalized communities are more resilient to adverse 
effects of climate change (and access to sustainable nature-based solutions).
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3: Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises
I: 3.1.1: Renewable energy share 
in the total final energy 
consumption. 
B: 26.2% T: > 35
Source: Annual reports, 
national plans and strategies, 
regulations, standards, 
commissioned reports; SDG 
reports, feasibility, 
socioeconomic and market 
expert studies; Integrated 
Resources Plan
Frequency: Annual
Responsibility: Departments of 
Energy, Environment, Trade 
and Industry, Higher Education, 
Science and Technology
Output 3.1 Solutions adopted to achieve universal 
access to clean, affordable and sustainable energy (SP 
output 1.5.1)
I: 3.1.1. # of renewable energy technologies and energyefficient solutions developed and applied to accelerate 
uptake at the local level (municipalities and residential 
households) with 50% beneficiaries being women-headed 
households
B: 0 T: 2 
I: 3.1.2. % of households (women-headed, rural, urban and 
peri-urban) benefiting from clean and affordable energy 
access 
B: 5% T: 10%
Ministries: Higher 
Education, Science & 
Technology, Industry, 
Commerce, Youth, Gender,
Departments of Energy and 
of Environment, Forestry 
and Fisheries
Development Bank of 
Southern Africa,
Regional water authorities, 
national partners,
NGOs and CSOs,
Private sector,
Think tanks
Regular
resources: 
1 086
Other 
resources: 45
000
I:3.1.2. % of terrestrial and 
freshwater ecosystem types that 
are well protected (domesticated 
indicator)
Output 3.2: Solutions scaled up for sustainable 
management of natural resources
23 Human Development Report 2019: South Africa’s Women Empowerment ProfileB: Terrestrial 28%, Fresh water
23% 
T: TBC
I: 3.2.1. # of nature-based solutions that contribute to 
enhancing sustainable livelihoods, especially for women 
and other vulnerable groups
B: 0 T: 5
I: 3.2.2. Natural resources that are managed under 
sustainable use, conservation, access and benefit-sharing 
regime (area under improved management and sustainable 
use)
B: 400 hectares T: 480 hectares