File Name: ZAF-NEES-2013-EN
Year: 2013
Country Name: South Africa
Country Code: ZAF
Category: NEES
Document Title: National Energy Efficiency Strategy
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2013
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Overview on the National Energy Efficiency 
Strategy (NEES) Post 2015 
Integrated Energy Plan Public Workshop 
Indaba Hotel 
26 September 2013 
Ptd bMkdi Mdi1. Background and context 
2. National Energy Efficiency Goals 
3. National Energy Efficiency Strategy (NEES) Objectives 
4. NEES Implementation 
5. Overall Energy Efficiency Policy Framework 
6. 1
st & 2nd NEES Review Process 
7. National EE Interventions 
8. NEES Implementation Progress: Standards 
9. NEES Implementation Regulations 
10. 25 Energy Efficiency Policy Recommendations by IEA 
11. Conclusion 
 • The White Paper on Energy Policy (1998) gives a mandate to the Department of
Energy (DoE) to pursue Energy Efficiency programmes which is one of the
lowest cost options for reducing energy consumption. 
• The NEES, was approved by Cabinet and released in 2005 to explore the
potential for improved energy utilisation through reducing the nation’s energy 
intensity (thus reducing greenhouse gas emissions), and decoupling economic 
growth from energy demand. 
• The original NEES stated that “Government will ensure that the necessary 
resources are made available to establish systems and legislation to facilitate the
specification, collection, storage, maintenance and supply of energy-related data,
according to the requirements of integrated energy planning and international 
standards.” • The NEES outlined how an overall energy intensity reduction target of 12% by
2015 could be achieved with the following sectoral energy efficiency 
improvement targets: 
 Industry and Mining (15%), 
 Commercial and Public buildings (15%), 
 Residential (10%) and
 Transport (9%). 
• The Implementation plans were drawn up for each of the sectors with forecasted 
targets of energy use reductions based upon assumptions about energy demand 
over the next 10 years (2005 – 2015 using the 2000 year baselines), including 
the associated drivers, such as the economic development and population 
growth. The Vision of the NEES is “Reducing the energy intensity of the economy through 
energy efficiency” 
Achievement of this vision will assist in fulfilling the following national objectives: 
 Enhancing energy security by making better use of existing and new
generation capacity. 
 Improving South Africa’s global competitiveness through reduced energy 
input cost. 
 Decoupling growth in energy consumption (and GHG emissions) from 
growth in GDP. 
 Improving global competitiveness will, in turn, contribute to job creation.• As part of implementing the 2005 NEES, interventions were to be implemented 
by concentrating on no-cost and low payback options with a high impact. These 
were to be followed by medium to long-term higher investment interventions. 
• However parallel to the implementation of the NEES, several legislative 
frameworks had to be developed or put in place including an energy efficiency
target Monitoring Methodology Handbook.
• The EE Target Monitoring Methodology Handbook provides a detailed input 
data-streams required, however it is worth noting that its review is also 
necessary to ensure that the South Africa’s energy efficiency monitoring system 
take full advantage of the current development and international best practice 
updates. 
• Lack of some of the enabling legislative frameworks and systems slowed down 
or delayed the full implementation as anticipated. Policy map, 
monitoring 
tool and 
Proposed 
NEEAP 
Framework 
State of 
Play 
National 
Stakeholders 
International 
Stakeholders 
Review of policy 
documentation, 
initiatives and 
programmes 
NEEAP 
international 
Best Practice • In 2008, the Department undertook the first review of the NEES, however the
review document was not favourably received by most of the stakeholders as it was 
clear on the comments from the public consultation process. 
• The comments needed a more radical alterations including clear definition of energy 
efficiency, monitoring system and baseline information, etc. 
• In 2011 the second review of the National Energy Efficiency Strategy (NEES) 
started, with public and sector workshops to discuss the scope and elements of the
NEES that need review. 
• Focused engagements/discussions were held on all related legislation, regulations 
and standards interlinked to the NEES to make sure that the final outcome remain 
relevant and practical for implementation and also get coherence on key issues. • In 2012 October, Cabinet approved the release of the second review NEES 
document for public consultation which closed in January 2013 too many request 
for extensions pushed the process to close in February and consolidation of the
comments was done in March 2013. 
• During the review process, an EE Policy Mapping Study was conducted through 
the South African Energy Programme (SAGEN) in collaboration with SANEDI and
GIZ. 
• The outputs of the study provided a comprehensive policy and legislative 
context for the development of the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
(NEEAP) for the Republic of South Africa. • The purpose of this review was therefore to:
– understand the existing energy efficiency policy and regulatory 
environment, key initiatives and programmes, and the stakeholders 
– develop the framework for a monitoring tool and action plan to be used
to assist in the development of a coordinated, unified and effective 
approach to: 
• energy efficiency, 
• energy conservation and 
• demand-side management.High Level Contextual Environment, Objectives and Targets – with reference to National EE Strategy 
Sector 1 Sector 2 Sector 3 Sector 4
Sector Breakdown – as defined in the National EE Strategy
Sector outline, overall targets and approach.
Opportunities and challenges.
Methodological approach.
Applicable legislation
Targeted / priority areas
Details of specific initiative number 1
Compliance with legislation or policy 
Details of specific initiative number 1 
Programme analysis and detail activities 
Details of specific initiative number 2
Compliance with legislation or policy 
Details of specific initiative number 2 
Programme analysis and detail activities 
Energy Efficiency Trends in South Africa 2000 – 2015 (to assess energy efficiency improvement levels) 
Alignment between individual programmes and overall objectivescycle of the Strategy is ending in 2015. 
• The focus was more on lessons learnt, identifying the gaps and how the gaps were and are 
being addressed and last focus on potential areas of improvement or strengthening 
opportunities and propose future recommendations (i.e. what can still be done prior to 2015). 
• All the recommendations will be implemented through the National Energy Efficiency Action 
Plan. 
• The NEEAP’s objectives amongst others is also to determine adjusted sector/sub-sector 
baselines from those developed in 2000 in preparation for the post-2015 NEES targets. 
• Other key deliverables of the NEEAP for the next 18 months is the finalisation of establishment 
and implementation of the energy efficiency monitoring system, energy management regulations 
and plans, measurement and verification of the past energy savings, functional energy efficiency 
incentive scheme. • Other campaigns 
including schools etc. 
gy 
street-lighting 
• Source supplyinstall of LED 
• Measure impact 
relative to baseline 
pg
• Measure baseline 
consumption 
• Source supplyinstall of technologies 
that reduce 
consumption 
• Measure impact 
relative to baseline 
p
local content. 
• Source installation 
and maintenance 
• Initiate Standard 
Offer model for solar 
geysers 
• Measure impact 
relative to baseline 
interventions through 
a Request for
Proposals 
• Measure impact 
relative to baseline 
Awareness Campaign Municipal 
Streetlighing 
Programme
Public Buildings 
Programme
Solar Water Heating 
Programme
Industrial EE 
Improvement 
Programme
Improve public 
awareness and 
increase public 
participation in EE 
programme
Increase Municipal 
revenues (decrease 
consumption) by 
retrofitting streetlighting with new 
technologies.
Retrofit HVAC, 
lighting etc. with 
new technologies, 
reduce energy 
consumption in line 
with building codes
Increase penetration 
in high consumption 
domestic areas by 
replacing electric 
geysers 
Decrease energy 
intensity through 
various other 
interventions 
(Request for 
Proposals)
Policy, Institutional Arrangements, Standards and Regulatory Mechanisms including the Measurement of 
baseline consumptions in respect of each programme followed by monitoring of targetsSANS 61400 
Wind 
Turbines 
SANS 50285 
Electric Lamps 
SANS 12567-1 
Windows & 
Doors 
SANS 1307 
Solar Water 
Heating 
SANS 60969 
Self-balasted 
Lamps 
SANS 10400-N 
Glazing 
SANS 959 
Series 
SANS 1935 & 
SANS 833 
SANS 50010 
Energy 
Savings 
SANS 54511-3 
Air 
Conditioners 
SANS 50001 
Energy 
Management 
SANS 204 
SANS 10400 – XA
Energy Efficiency 
in Buildings 
SANS 1561-1 
Low-voltage 
Three-phase 
induction 
Motors 
SANS 62087 
Audio &Video 
Equipment 
SANS 428 
Insulated 
Buildings 
SANS 60034-30
3-Phase Cage 
Induction 
Electrical Motor 
SANS 941 
Typical Energy 
Efficiency Label 
SANS 61199 
Single capped 
Fluorescent 
Lamps
SANS 50229 
Clothes 
Washer-dryer 
SANS 60456 
Clothes 
Washing 
Machine SANS 10147 
Refrigeration 
Plant 
SANS 50304 
Electric 
Cooking 
Range 
SANS 62552 
Household 
Refrigeration 
SANS 20100 
Vehicles 
Emissions 
SANS 20100 
Vehicles with 
Electric 
Power Train 
SANS 1381-4 
Reflective Foil 
Laminate 
SANS 959 
Series 
SANS 1935 & 
SANS 833 
SANS 1935 & 
SANS 833 
Petrol & Diesel 
Fuel Pump 
SANS 151 
Electric Geysers • The Department together with the dti and National Treasury finalised the
Regulations for Allowance on Energy Efficiency Savings and were developed in
terms of Section 12L of the Income Tax Act and will be enforced through Tax 
Amendment Laws, 2013
• The Regulations are expected to be promulgated prior to the end of financial 
year. 
• SANEDI is expected to facilitate the certification process prior to companies 
claiming the incentive through the SARS. 
• Preparations are in progress to enforce the regulations once promulgated. • Income Tax Allowance on Energy Efficiency Savings (section 12i & 12L of
the Income Tax Act).
– Regulations in terms of Section 12i of the Income Tax Act administered 
by the dti aimed at the large manufacturing investments (i.e. upgrades, 
expansions or new facilities that exceed R30 million and R200 million 
respectively). 
– The National Building Codes and Regulations 
– Minimum Energy Performance Specifications (MEPS) of household
electricity appliances are being developed including energy 
performance of buildings. 
• Mandatory provision of energy management plan is being considered with 
stakeholders – Draft Regulations on Energy Management are in progress. Strategy post 2015. The post 2015 preparations will be based on the 25 Energy Efficiency 
Policy Recommendations developed by the International Energy Agency that member and 
non-member countries should consider in the context of their energy economies. 
• These policy recommendations are developed for seven priority areas within which some of
the work has already being implemented, that is: 
 Cross-sectoral 
 Buildings
 Appliances and equipment
 Lighting
 Transport 
 Industry; and Energy utilities
• According IEA, 2008 estimates that if implemented globally without delay, the proposed 
actions could save as much as 7.6 gigatonnes (Gt)CO2 /year by 2030.– 
Policy Recommendation 
Priority area
Focus on Priority Areas
Cross-sectoral • Data Collection and Indicators 
• Strategies and action plans 
• Private investment in energy efficiency 
• Monitoring, enforcement and evaluation 
• Competitive energy markets with appropriate regulation 
Buildings • Mandatory building codes and MEPS 
• Net-zero energy consumption in buildings 
• Improved energy efficiency in existing buildings 
• Building energy labels or certificates
• Energy performance of building components and 
systems 
Appliances and equipment • Mandatory MEPS and labels
• Test standards and measurement protocols 
• Market transformation policies – 
Policy
Recommendation 
Priority area
Focus on Priority Areas
Lighting • Phase out of inefficient lighting products 
• Energy-efficient lighting systems 
Transport • Mandatory vehicle fuel-efficiency standards 
• Measures to improve vehicle fuel efficiency 
• Fuel-efficient non-engine components 
• Eco-driving 
• Transport system efficiency 
Industry • Energy Management 
• High efficiency industrial equipment and systems 
• Energy Efficiency services for SMEs 
• Complimentary policies to support industrial energy efficiency 
Energy Utilities • Utilities end-se energy efficiency schemes gy y gg ypy 
– The second review of the 2005 National Energy Efficiency Strategy 
assisted in identifying the gaps while recommendations are put forward 
for implementation through the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan 
as priority areas for the next 18 years; 
– Identified areas that require closing the gaps through the development 
of standards and regulations on energy efficiency; 
– The Review strengthened the plan for the process to establish post2015 National Energy Efficiency Strategy 