File Name: ZWE-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Zimbabwe
Country Code: ZWE
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 August to 2 September 2021
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the
United Nations Office for 
Project Services
Distr.: General
2 July 2021
Original: English
Second regular session 2021
30 August to 2 September 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Zimbabwe (2022–2026)
Contents
2109123X (E) 150721
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Zimbabwe (2022-2026)……………………………………… 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. In 2020, Zimbabwe is a lower-middle income country of 15.5 million people of whom 
two-thirds lived in rural areas, 52 per cent were females, 68 per cent were youth, and 9 per
cent were living with at least one form of disability.
1 The country’s human development index 
value for 2019 was 0.571, putting it in the medium human development category and ranking 
it at 150 out of 189 countries. Its gender inequality index value of 0.527 ranks the country at 
129 out of 162 countries.
2 Zimbabwe has endured a series of disruptive socioeconomic and 
climatic shocks and crises that have pushed millions into extreme multidimensional poverty, 
threatening the country’s progress to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Despite a 
progressive constitution, the country’s governance challenges are rooted in unresolved 
historical grievances, unmet expectations, human rights complaints and contested elections 
that have weakened the social contract, led to polarization, and created a deficit of trust in key 
institutions. The COVID-19 pandemic further compounded these challenges, deepening the 
inequality gap and pushing more people (60 per cent) into informality.
3
2. The United Nations Common Country Assessment notes the progress made in the first 
decade of Zimbabwe’s independence; however, recent decades have recorded modest 
improvements and some declining socio-economic development indicators. The Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG) index declined by 2.4 per cent over the past three years on the 
back of increasing levels of poverty (especially during 2020),4 high levels of informality, and 
deepening vulnerability induced by repetitive climatic and economic shocks, as evidenced by 
an increasing humanitarian caseload.5 Positively, during 2020 Zimbabwe registered a level of 
macroeconomic stability, though precarious, and continued to show progress in health and 
educational outcomes, evidenced by the achievement of the overall 90-90-90 goal for 
HIV/AIDS of the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in 2020 and 
sustained high levels of literacy.
3. The national Vision 2030 is a bold and ambitious blueprint charting a new long-term,
transformative and inclusive development agenda that aims to propel Zimbabwe into a 
prosperous and empowered upper middle-income society by 2030. Vision 2030 is 
implemented through national development strategies, the first being the National 
Development Strategy I 2021-2025 (NDS1), which forms the foundation for the current
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF).
4. The UNSDCF to which UNDP will contribute to places people at the centre of 
development, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized. This includes youth, who form 
68 per cent of the population but lack employment opportunities; women, who experience high 
rates of poverty and are far behind their male counterparts in terms of education, political 
representation, and social and economic empowerment – owing largely to customary law 
based on the patriarchal nature of Zimbabwean society that acts as a key structural barrier to 
women’s advancement; and persons with disabilities, who are more likely to face stigma, 
abuse and exclusion from education, social protection and employment. In so doing, the 
UNSDCF supports NDS1 objectives and national SDG priorities by pursuing four outcomes 
via the following strategic priorities:
• People: ensuring a people-centred equitable, human development and well-being by 
addressing structural and societal inequalities and strengthening capacities at subnational 
levels to deliver quality basic services; 
1ZIMSTAT population projections report of 2015.
2 Human Development Report 2020.
3 International Monetary Fund working paper 2018
4 2020 Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee.
5 Comparison of humanitarian response plans over the years• Planet: strengthening environmental protection, climate resilience and natural resource 
management for a sustainable balance between people, planet and prosperity; 
• Prosperity: fostering equitable, sustainable and transformative economic growth that 
contributes to lifting people out of multidimensional poverty; and 
• Peace: strengthening transformative, accountable, equitable and inclusive governance
that uphold rule of law, human rights and access to justice and promotes peoples’ voice and 
participation as key tenets of good governance.
5. UNDP will support the United Nations system in achieving the outcomes of the UNSDCF 
via its integrator role, using a two-pronged strategic approach centred on resilience: resilience 
of the people and resilience of the systems serving the people. These two distinct, yet mutually 
reinforcing prongs, have been identified based on evaluative feedback on UNDP positioning 
and experience,
6
and a broadly shared realization that current aid practices promote neither a 
sustainable nor transformative approach to development. The underlying strategy of the 
UNSDCF emphasizes the need to shift from humanitarian and operational support in the social 
sectors – which is outside of, yet complementary to, government – towards building the 
capacity of national and subnational structures and systems to deliver more people-centred 
development interventions. 
6. UNDP will support this systems resilience strategy across all UNSDCF priority areas as 
a connector of service delivery-oriented partnerships among government, United Nations
entities, bilateral and multilateral partners, civil society organizations (CSOs) and the private 
sector. The UNDP comparative advantage stems from its strategic positioning and trust 
generated during previous programming cycles and ongoing investments at national and 
subnational levels to strengthen systems and reforms. These include developing a public sector 
reform strategic plan; supporting constitutional reform; strengthening independent oversight 
institutions; developing local government service-level benchmarks; and bolstering health 
systems through a decade of successfully implementing grants from the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Moving forward, in partnership with United Nations
organizations and others, UNDP will contribute to UNSDCF objectives by expanding its 
engagement at the subnational level to improve service delivery as part of United Nations
support to the country’s devolution agenda in line with NDS1. It will place special emphasis 
on strengthening capacities of health systems and communities to scale up HIV treatment and 
care and augment the national response to COVID-19, including through digitized distribution 
systems established under the Global Fund to support the vaccination drive. UNDP will also
lead United Nations efforts to strengthen rule of law and accountability of institutions through 
improved oversight.
7. In building the resilience of the people, UNDP has a successful track record as 
manager of the Zimbabwe Resilience Building Fund (ZRBF), which has enhanced the 
resilience capacities and mitigated the negative effects of shocks on the food security status 
of over 870,000 people in the most vulnerable districts.7 UNDP also has built the resilience 
of communities in climate vulnerable areas, based on evidence from multi-hazard mapping8
and a high frequency monitoring system. UNDP will support UNSDCF efforts to build a 
broad collective of partners to implement a deliberate resilience strategy,
9
leaning on its 
experience and ability to deliver integrated programming across the poverty-environment 
nexus and to leverage its engagement with the informal sector. UNDP will bring its 
experience of unlocking international climate and environment finance and managing multidonor mechanisms for common climate outcomes, in coordination with United Nations 
organizations and other partners.
6 The Zimbabwe United Nations Development Assistance Framework (ZUNDAF) evaluation report 2019.
7 Outcome monitoring survey 2.
8 Analyses of spatial distribution and convergence of nine hazards (multi-hazard maps), Zimbabwe Resilience Building Fund.
9 Finding 5independent country programme evaluation20198. Drawing on lessons from the United Nations socioeconomic response plan to COVID19, which emphasizes the need for disaster risk management and better coping mechanisms 
for shocks and stresses, and an integrated approach that safeguards livelihoods in the second 
largest informal economy in the world, UNDP will continue to leverage its accelerator lab 
experience to strengthen the evidence base and apply a data-driven approach to programme
delivery for the UNSDCF. Innovations in collecting, monitoring and evaluating data from 
spatial computing and augmented reality visualization to test and scale interventions will 
enhance efficiency and quality of datasets and provide necessary linkages across UNSDCF 
outcomes. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
9. The country programme’s overarching theory of change can be summarized as follows:
if government capacities at national and subnational levels are enhanced and policies, 
strategies and institutional frameworks to boost resilient, inclusive, sustainable socioeconomic 
growth, transparency and accountability are operationalized, and if people’s rights, voice and 
participation are upheld, especially for the most vulnerable and marginalized, and property 
rights recognized, and if renewable energy pathways are pursued and risk-informed 
sustainable livelihood opportunities expanded, green economic growth stimulated, and 
natural resource management improved, then delivery of inclusive, efficient and demanddriven services and pro-poor development solutions and confidence in government systems 
will improve, private and public investments will be incentivized, and jobs will be created, 
and then people, institutional and community resilience will be strengthened, leading to 
transformative change in the standard of living/quality of life for the people.
10. Given its unique mandate, UNDP views the four UNSDCF priorities as interrelated, 
especially those that address economic growth and environment/climate change. Therefore, 
UNDP will apply a holistic development approach based on its integrator role, comparative 
advantage, and demonstrated track record, as evidenced by the findings of the independent 
country programme evaluation and various evaluations and surveys. The programme was 
developed in collaboration with national partners as part of the broader consultation process 
for the UNSDCF. The country programme will remain aligned with Vision 2030, the NDS1, 
and the UNDP strategic plan. In line with the recommendations of the independent country 
programme evaluation,10 UNDP will build deliberate cross-programme synergies across the 
UNSDCF priorities and engage an even wider network of partners to ensure the use of a human 
rights-based approach throughout the programme that emphasizes principles of leaving no one 
behind, and doing no harm to ensure that all human rights, including political, economic, 
social and environmental rights, are upheld. UNDP will work with other United Nations
partners to address gender equality and women’s empowerment with a focus on women’s 
representation in political, economic and social spheres, as well as addressing issues of sexual 
and gender-based violence. 
11. To expand delivery of critical social services, Zimbabwe needs to strengthen the 
resilience of its health care system and scale up community-based social protection systems.
The UNDP response to the UNSDCF people-centred equitable, human development and wellbeing priority area (Goals 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 17) is aligned to the national HIV and AIDS 
strategic plan, 2021–2025, and addresses the geographic variance in the country’s HIV 
epidemic, where the Matabeleland North and South and Bulawayo provinces constitute the 
highest prevalence, rural/urban disparities, as well as gender and age-related inequalities. 
Jointly with the United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), UNDP 
will support uninterrupted delivery of antiretrovirals to people living with HIV and scale up 
quality and coverage of community-led HIV prevention interventions, including education 
support, and sexual and reproductive health rights to address the needs of adolescent girls and 
young women in targeted districts of the three provinces mentioned above. Furthermore, 
10 UNDP Independent Evaluation Office
Independent Country Programme Evaluation: Zimbabwe2020UNDP, as part of the Joint United Nations Team on HIV/AIDS, will work jointly with the 
World Health Organization, UNAIDS, UNFPA and others to advocate for policies that serve 
the rights of key populations by removing human rights barriers to access to HIV services and 
by creating more enabling environments to scale up HIV services.
12. UNDP will leverage its convening power to advocate for institutional reform and 
capacity strengthening of the national pharmaceutical system in order to foster an efficient, 
accountable supply chain that ensures uninterrupted delivery of quality medicines, including 
COVID-19 vaccines and antiretrovirals to all health facilities, and that supports the 
development and implementation of a sustainable human resources for health strategy. Scaling
up of the Solar4Health initiative – an example of a truly integrated programming – will target 
rural areas first to ensure uninterrupted delivery of quality basic services to vulnerable 
populations, including people living with HIV, tuberculosis and malaria. Together with 
partners, UNDP will support livelihood interventions for the vulnerable (including the 
informal sector) and a well-designed system of social protection to defend those still left in 
poverty.
13. UNDP will focus on the economy-environment-climate change nexus in addressing the
UNSDCF priority areas of environmental protection, climate resilience and natural resource 
management, as well as equitable, sustainable and transformative economic growth (Goals 5,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 17). This will contribute to increasing the development of and access 
to renewable energy and set the country on a low-emissions development trajectory while
facilitating sustainable socioeconomic development. A human rights-based approach that 
works with rights-holders and duty-bearers and draws on the principle of fulfilling economic, 
social and environmental rights will underpin the governance lens for this intervention. This 
will include integrating gender and disability considerations into the design, implementation 
and monitoring of policies, as women and people with disabilities are more negatively affected 
by climate change, environmental degradation, crises due to food insecurity, loss of 
livelihoods, and the resultant increase in domestic violence. 
14. UNDP will support the Government in delivering on its national climate change policy 
and resilient ecosystems targets by focusing on key sectors such as mining and energy, 
agriculture, forestry and waste management, bringing benefits to rural and urban youth and 
women in the most climate-affected parts of the country. Building on its ongoing whole-ofsociety and strong partnership approach for climate action, UNDP collaboration with the 
private sector will be expanded to enhance diversified, clean production and develop financing 
mechanisms that enable a national climate response that reduces impact on landscapes and 
ecosystems.
15. With access to electricity in rural areas at only 28 per cent, UNDP will seize the
opportunity to offer accelerated low-emission development and livelihoods transformation 
solutions for off-grid populations while reducing pressure on forests. Partnering with other 
United Nations organizations and the private sector, UNDP will support implementation of 
the new renewable energy policy and adoption of renewable energy at scale by smallholder 
farmers and small, medium and micro-enterprises (MSME), targeting women, persons with 
disabilities, and youth for productive activities. The support will also provide lighting, heating 
and clean water for targeted rural schools, homes and health facilities through the 
Solar4Health initiative. Similar efforts will be devoted to developing an enabling investment 
and policy environment for renewable energy and harnessing private sector financing through 
the National Climate Finance Facility.
16. Given that agriculture is a significant contributor to economic growth,11 climate proofing 
of production and related value chains remains an indispensable agenda. In line with the 
country’s national agriculture and food systems transformation strategy and the Green Climate 
11 The sector accounts for an average of 16 per cent of gross domestic product (1980-2000), over 70 per cent of exports, and about 
70 per cent of employmentFund-supported climate change adaptation programmes, UNDP will help to scale up 
investments to address institutional and policy gaps, strengthen capacity for smallholder 
farmers, small and medium-sized enterprises, and create entrepreneurship initiatives for agrobased informal sector players. The market diagnostics of its Accelerator Labs positions UNDP 
to scale up its support to resilient and sustainable agricultural practices12 and evidence-based 
disaster risk reduction through robust early warning systems in response to climate, health and 
economic risks. UNDP will continue to expand local markets, strengthen rural-urban linkages,
harness export trade opportunities, and accelerate technology transfer and the creation of onfarm and off-farm green jobs focused on youth, people with disabilities and women. 
Ownership and secure access to land and livestock, as well as roads, water conveyancing 
systems and natural resources, are critical for sustainable land-based investment and economic 
growth. Therefore, UNDP will continue to provide skills and capacity to secure access to 
productive assets and maintenance thereof. In line with its upcoming regional strategy for 
private sector partnerships and access to climate finance in Africa, UNDP will explore private 
finance for sustainable agriculture and resilient urban infrastructure.
17. Although rural areas have higher poverty rates, the high dependence on informal, nonwage income streams, and increasing vulnerability of urban communities to shocks, renders 
urban communities equally in need of economic empowerment. Drawing from the 
comprehensive urban resilience study,
13 experiences from the ZRBF, and initial support under 
the COVID-19 response, UNDP will scale up interventions and focus on the urban informal 
sector. A phased approach towards formalization of the sector – while recognizing the need 
for protection and empowerment – will enhance social services and protection for informal 
workers, while exploring opportunities for revenue generation from the largely untaxed 
sector. UNDP will partner with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), the United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) and the United Nations 
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) to promote access 
to finance, skills development and expansion of market linkages for workers in the informal 
economy, with a specific focus on youth and women. UNDP will crowd-in private sector 
financing to increase service delivery for rural communities, create green jobs, and expand 
markets for clean energy. UNDP will prioritize enterprises owned by women, people with 
disabilities, and youth to stimulate decent employment and facilitate market access for 
medium and small enterprises through the African Continental Free Trade Area.
18. Considering the high priority the NDS1 gives to the devolution agenda, the UNSDCF has 
recognized devolution and decentralization as the ‘how-to’ strategy to facilitate the 
achievement of all cooperation results. UNDP support to transformative, accountable, 
equitable and inclusive governance under the UNSDCF (Goals 5, 10, 16, 17) will therefore 
build on the current support to national-level government entities14 on the devolution strategy
and rollout, as part of the ongoing public sector reform strategy. UNDP will supply the tools
and methodologies to foster the partnership between United Nations organizations and the 
Government for effective service delivery, including its connection with the fiscal 
decentralization process. UNDP will work to enhance cooperation with the World Bank Group, 
leveraging its expertise in public financial management, procurement, revenue and budget 
management, in alignment as relevant with related work in the integrated national financing 
frameworks. UNDP will also support relevant institutional strengthening initiatives across all 
four pillars, working with partners to develop sustainability and scaling strategies for greater 
impact beyond initial UNDP support. 
12 UNDP Zimbabwe Resilience Fund Resilient and Sustainable Agriculture Manual has been developed specifically for the 
Zimbabwe context.
13 Urban Resilience study
14 Public Service Commission, Office of President and Cabinet, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Finance and Economic 
Development19. In partnership with United Nations organizations and other partners that have sectoral 
expertise (such as UNICEF on primary education), UNDP will help subnational entities 
modernize the public sector for enhanced service delivery and human capital development, 
including support to a functional review process. UNDP will promote behavioural and cultural
change that leads to meritocracy; modernize systems and procedures using technology and esolutions supported by lessons learned from accelerator lab experimentation; and strengthen 
checks and balances to curb misuse of power and address corruption. The large-scale use of 
mobile phones offers unique opportunities for large sections of the population normally left 
behind to access government services and fosters further exploration of the digital finance 
ecosystem, including digital remittances, within the broader SDG financing agenda. 
20. Building on past successes in facilitating constitutional reform, harmonized elections, 
and resolving legacy land disputes, UNDP will continue to foster partnerships, provide 
technical assistance, strengthen institutional capacity, and promote peoples’ participation in 
democratic processes. In line with the recommendations of the 2020 needs assessment 
mission15 and the national Election Commission’s strategic plan, UNDP will provide 
assistance to the electoral processes leading up to the 2023 election and beyond, including 
boundary delimitation, biometric voter registration, stakeholder engagement, and results 
management. In collaboration with civil society, independent commissions, the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and UN-Women,
UNDP will strengthen aspects of voter education, expansion of digital technologies and citizen 
participation and address disinformation and hate speech.
21. Noting that strong oversight and accountable institutions give voice and empower 
people to demand their rights, UNDP will work with governance institutions and the people 
to establish dialogue platforms that allow for the co-creation of policy solutions that reduce 
inequalities, exclusion and discrimination for women, youth, people with disabilities, ethnic 
and sexual minorities. Leveraging investments in virtual parliament and virtual courts (as part 
of the COVID response), UNDP will support peoples’ engagement and access to justice using 
modern technologies, rendering the legislative, oversight and judiciary process more 
accessible. In addition, UNDP will lead UNSDCF work to strengthen the investigative, 
monitoring and complaints handling mandate of the independent commissions that will 
facilitate the country’s reporting to human rights mechanisms and strengthen the rule of law.
22. Given prior investments in sustaining peace and rebuilding the social contract between 
the people and government institutions, UNDP will scale up responsive infrastructures for 
peace that benefit from data-driven anticipatory early warning and early response systems 
and help bridge the trust deficit between the people and the state. UNDP will use its trusted 
partner role to support effective collaboration among local authorities, civil society and 
communities at large, as well as development partners, to create dialogue spaces to deepen 
democratic discourse, address the legacy of impunity, and advocate for accountability for 
past violations. 
III. Programme and risk management 
23. Even with the expectations of a new dawn following the 2018 election, Zimbabwe 
continues to experience challenges that affects governance mechanisms and the economic 
sectors, impacting public opinions and normalization of relations with development partners, 
despite gains in reforms. The programme period coincides with 2023 elections, which would 
likely affect programme implementation as priorities shift to elections and away from the 
long-term development agenda. UNDP will manage this risk through continuous scanning of 
the operating environment via early warning systems, proactive engagement with the 
Government, in close collaboration with the United Nations country team and the Resident 
Coordinator, to address emerging issues and ensure close programme monitoring and 
15 The United Nations electoral needs assessment mission
20 to 31 January 2020adjustment. UNDP will include a programme criticality exercise as part of the annual review 
process to consider changes in the development or financial context that may necessitate 
adjustments in the programme strategy.
24. The protracted humanitarian situation, further aggravated by the COVID-19 pandemic, 
has resulted in prioritization of the social sectors and limited allocations to the economic and 
governance sectors. If the humanitarian situation continues, coupled with delayed 
normalization of relations with key development partners, there is the risk that UNDP will be
unable to mobilize sufficient financial support to deliver on its contribution to public sector 
reform and the decentralization agenda. UNDP will mitigate this risk by strategically
positioning itself with trusted partners, for example through its current engagements in 
partners’ programming cycles, combined with strengthened South-South cooperation, which 
has led to successful initiatives in supporting nationally determined contributions, Cyclone 
Idai, and COVID-19 responses.
25. Devolution in Zimbabwe is being implemented in a context of polarization and political 
contestation. United Nations capacity to leverage support may be limited by donor perceptions 
on whether the Government is committed to reform. Therefore, as part of the UNSDCF 
sustainability strategy, UNDP, as part of a joint United Nations effort, will advocate for the 
implementation of devolution, including release of at least 5 per cent from the fiscus for 
provincial and local authority budgets to ensure that areas lagging in development are 
prioritized. Furthermore, UNDP will use its integrator role to rally partnerships to support the 
devolution agenda through a joint approach that draws on the strength of the bi/multilateral 
institutions in public finance management, policy and economic analysis, and on the UNDP
comparative advantage in capacity development, service delivery and convening power.
26. UNDP will apply corporate social and environmental safeguards and accountability 
mechanisms and will commission regular quality assessments of its programme and projects 
at inception and during implementation to ensure potential risks and impacts are identified 
and a management plan is instituted.
27. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels, with respect to country programmes, is prescribed 
in the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
28. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force majeure. 
The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. As 
part of the implementation structure of NDS1, the Government is launching sector working 
groups to coordinate development assistance and government efforts in key sectors. UNDP 
will participate in relevant sector working groups that will also form the high-level 
coordination platform for the country programme.
IV. Monitoring and evaluation
29. The outcomes and performance indicators of the country programme have been aligned 
to the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, the UNSDCF 2022-2026 and the NDS1 and were 
informed by the analysis and recommendations of the independent country programme 
evaluation. Due to the increasing demand for data and evidence-based analysis, UNDP will 
embrace tools and methodologies, such as online beneficiary feedback mechanisms and realtime monitoring, reporting and micro-narratives, building on traditional methods of data collection. Regular monitoring across outcome areas will be undertaken as part of the joint 
UNSDCF workplan. The UNSDCF results groups will be co-chaired by the respective United 
Nations organization outcome lead and the government counterpart and will meet on a 
quarterly basis, while the high-level annual review will be co-chaired by the Resident 
Coordinator and the Chief Secretary, Office of the President, and the Cabinet. 
30. Evaluations at programme and project level will be executed as defined in the 
evaluation plan for the purpose of learning/knowledge management, adaptive programming, 
and quality assurance and as agreed with development partners. The evaluation plan covers
all four outcomes, as well as projects meeting the corporate evaluation threshold. Under this 
framework, the evaluation plan will be reviewed periodically and evaluations of new projects 
will be added as appropriate. UNDP will participate in United Nations-wide evaluations, as 
part of UNSDCF requirements. Five per cent of the country programme budget will be 
allocated to evaluation. Project quality assessments, including use of the gender marker, will 
continue to be undertaken using corporate programming quality standards.
31. Together with other United Nations organizations, UNDP will continue to build the 
monitoring and evaluation capacities of its implementing partners and the Government, 
through strategic support to the NDS1 monitoring and evaluation system and the SDG 
framework. This work is particularly important as it coincides with the Decade of Action and 
the final countdown to the country’s Vision 2030. UNDP will build capacities for data 
generation and analysis, working in collaboration with the Zimbabwe National Statistics 
Agency. UNDP will complement the SDG financing angle by providing overall technical 
support to establish an integrated national financing framework. 
32. UNDP will use various communications strategies and tools to provide information not 
only about its results but also to augment its advocacy efforts around key development issues. 
Traditional and social media platforms will be used to tailor communications products to 
specific audiences, and communications costs will be covered by programme and project 
budgets.Annex. Results and resources framework for Zimbabwe (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS1 priorities: health and well-being, human capital development and innovation, social protection, devolution and decentralization.
1. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: By 2026, all people in Zimbabwe, especially women and girls and those in the most vulnerable 
and marginalized communities, benefit from equitable and quality social services and protection.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY 
OF DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
MAJOR PARTNERS 
/ PART\NERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME
(United States dollars)
Coverage of essential health 
services 
Baseline: TBA
Target: TBA
Ministry of Health and Child Care
surveys, Global Fund reports 
OUTPUT 1.1. Capacities at 
national and subnational levels 
strengthened to deliver basic 
services, including HIV-related 
services 
1.1.1. Proportion of people living 
with HIV on treatment with viral 
load suppression.
Baseline: 80% (2020), male 75%, 
female 86%
Target: 94% (2023), male 95%, 
female 96%
Source: Ministry of Health
1.1.2. Percentage of health 
facilities with tracer medicines for 
(malaria, tuberculosis, HIV)
available on day of visit or 
reporting.
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 70% (2023)
Source: Ministry of Health
OUTPUT 1.2. National and 
community-level capacities 
developed for progressive 
expansion of inclusive social 
protection systems
Global Fund, National 
Aids Council, Ministry 
of Health and Child 
Care, UNAIDS
Regular: 2,064,703
Other: 796,147,471.00DP/DCP/ZWE/4DP/DCP/ZWE/4
1.2.1. Inclusive policy guidelines 
for social protection systems 
developed and implemented as a 
result of UNDP interventions.
Baseline: 2 (2021)
Target: 5 (2026)
Source: Project reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS1 priorities: food and nutrition security, cross-cutting issues (environmental protection, climate resilience and natural resource management).
2. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: By 2026, all people in Zimbabwe, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, benefit from 
greater environmental stability and robust food systems in support of healthy lives and equitable, sustainable and resilient livelihoods.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3. Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises.
Proportion of local governments 
that adopt and implement local 
disaster risk reduction strategies 
in line with national disaster risk 
reduction strategies 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Outcome monitoring reports, sense 
making reports
OUTPUT 2.1. Enhanced 
resilience and livelihoods of 
vulnerable people, communities 
and regions
2.1.1. Number of vulnerable people 
benefiting from diversified climate 
resilient livelihood options (agrobased).
Baseline: 1,115,326 people (2021),
426,719 males, 688,607 females, 
20% youth representation (3,928)
Target: 375,000 new (2023) 
60% females, 40% males, 
20% youth 
Source: ZRBF reports
2.1.2. Number of people whose 
resilience has been improved as a 
result of resilience-building 
support.
Baseline: 529,686 people (2020),
194,627 males, 269,938 females,
youth 133,611
Target: 830,000 (2023) 
60% females, 40% males,
20% youth
Source: ZRBF
Swedish International 
Development 
Cooperation Agency 
(SIDA), the United 
Kingdom Foreign, 
Commonwealth and 
Development Office 
(FCDO), the European 
Union, World Food 
Programme (WFP), 
FAO, the Green 
Environment Fund 
(GEF), Green Climate 
Fund (GCF), Ministry 
of Environment, 
Climate, Tourism and 
Hospitality Industry, 
MLAWRR
Regular: 3,120,963
Other: 156,313,314Total greenhouse gas emissions 
per year 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
OUTPUT 2. Tools and 
mechanisms applied to enable 
evidence-based, risk-informed 
planning, prevention and 
preparedness to climate hazards
by smallholder farmers and 
supporting institutions
2.2.1. Number of weather and 
hydrological monitoring stations 
developed in key catchments areas 
providing timely and accessible 
hydro-met information.
Baseline: 18 (2021)
Target: 32 (2026)
Source: Meteorological Services 
Department (MSD) reports
2.2.2. Number of smallholder 
farmers and institutions receiving 
new advisories and warnings 
through various media developed 
for both agriculture and water 
management.
Baseline: Smallholder farmers 0 
(2021),institutions 0 (2021)
Target: Smallholder farmers 
360,000 (2026), 60% females,
40% males, 20% youth,institutions 
at least five types (2026)
Source: GCF/ZRBF 
OUTPUT 2.3. Solutions scaled 
up for sustainable management 
of natural resources, ecosystem 
services, chemicals and waste 
management
2.3.1. Land area under active 
sustainable natural resources 
management.
Baseline: 1,368,190ha (2021)
Target: 1,645,466.20ha (2024) DP/DCP/ZWE/4DP/DCP/ZWE/4
Source: Ministry of Environment 
reports
2.3.2. Existing protected area under 
improved management using 
UNDP capacity scorecard.
Baseline: 1(2021)
Target: 3 (2024)
Source: UNDP
2.3.4. Amount of chemicals, 
greenhouse gases, 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons 
reduced, sequestrated or offset as a 
direct result of UNDP 
interventions.
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 834,819 (tCO2eq) (2024)
Source: GEF
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS1 priorities: economic growth and stability, structural transformation and value chains, infrastructure, utilities and digital economy.
3. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: By 2026, all people in Zimbabwe, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, benefit from 
more inclusive and sustainable economic growth with decent employment opportunities.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions. 
Unemployment rate, by sex, age 
and persons with disabilities 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
MLAWRR project reports Output 3.1. Capacities of key 
institutions enabled to design and 
implement gender-responsive and 
evidence-based policies, strategies 
and programmes for sustainable 
and equitable economic 
development 
3.1.1. Number of gender-responsive 
pro-poor policies developed and 
implemented to facilitate SEED. 
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 5 developed and 3 
implemented (2026)
Source: Ministry reports
MLAWRR, 
Ministry of Finance 
and Economic 
Development
Regular: 6,754,667
Other: 55,220,000Proportion of population living 
below the international and 
national poverty line, by sex and 
age employment status and 
3.1.2. Number of national and 
subnational institutions capacitated to 
implement SEED policies.
Baseline: 2 (2020)
Target: 7 (2026)
Source: MDAs reports
OUTPUT 3.2. Institutions 
capacitated, vulnerable groups and 
MSMEs active in the informal 
sector are enabled to access 
sustainable livelihoods and decent 
work and employment
3.2.1. Number of rural and urban 
people benefiting from green and 
decent jobs and having improved 
livelihoods.
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 5,000 (2026) 20% youth; 
60% females, 40% males
Source: UNDP project reports
3.2.2. Number of institutions 
developing and implementing 
evidence-based policies that facilitate 
phased formalization of the informal 
sector.
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 2 (2024)
Source: UNDP
3.2.3. Number of informal sector 
players formalized.
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: 30% of 5,000 informal sector 
players in urban markets
Source: UNDP reports
OUPUT 3.3. Solutions developed, 
financed and applied at scale for 
energy efficiency, transformation to 
clean energy and low-carbon 
developmentDP/DCP/ZWE/4DP/DCP/ZWE/4
geographic location 
(urban/rural) 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
3.3.1. Volume of low-carbon 
investment leveraged from public and 
private sources.
Baseline: 0 (2021)
Target: $50 million (2026)
Source: Partner reports
3.3.2. Number of sectors incorporating 
low-carbon strategies to promote 
economic diversification and green 
growth.
Baseline: 0 (2020)
Target: 3 (2026)
Source: Ministry reports
3.3.3. Number of vulnerable 
households and rural public 
institutions with access to solar 
energy. 
Baseline: 405 institutions, 0 hh (2020)
Target: 642 institutions new, 1,878hh 
new (2026)
Source: UNDP reports
NATIONAL PRIORITY: NDS1 priorities: cross-cutting issues (governance, public service delivery, justice delivery, combatting corruption, human rights and freedoms, social 
cohesion, national unity, peace and reconciliation, transparency and accountability).
4. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: By 2026, all people in Zimbabwe, especially the most vulnerable and marginalized, benefit from 
more accountable institutions and systems for rule of law, human rights and access to justice.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
Proportion of population by sex, 
age, disability who indicate 
satisfaction in surveys with their 
last experience of public services 
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Sense making, perception surveys, 
projects reports 
OUTPUT 4.1. Capacities, 
functions and financing of rule of 
law, human rights and peace 
institutions and systems 
strengthened to expand access to 
justice, human rights services 
and combat discrimination
4.1.1. Number of automated 
systems supporting access to rule 
Judicial Service 
Commission, 
Zimbabwe Human 
Rights Commission, 
Public Service 
Commission, 
Parliament of 
Zimbabwe, Zimbabwe 
Electoral Commission
(ZEC), UNICEF, UNRegular: 7,512,667
Other: 18,718,959Proportions of positions in 
national and local institutions, 
including (a) the legislatures; 
(b) the public service; and (c) the 
judiciary, compared to national 
distributions, by sex, age, persons 
with disabilities, and population 
groups
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
Level of compliance with 
international, continental and 
of law, justice and human rights 
services.
Baseline: 6 (2020)
Target: 15 (2026)
Source: Partner reports
4.1.2. Number of institutions 
implementing human rights 
recommendations in fulfilment of 
nationally and internationally 
ratified human rights obligations.
Baseline: 10 (2020)
Target: 20 (2026)
Source: Partner reports 
OUTPUT 4.2. Enhanced capacity
to mobilize, manage and account 
for resources effectively for 
inclusive service delivery that 
builds trust and social cohesion,
with a focus at the subnational 
level 
4.1.1. Number of draft laws, 
policies and plans relevant to 
administrative and fiscal reforms 
developed and submitted to 
Cabinet and Parliament.
Baseline: 1 (2021)
Target: 5 (2026)
Source: Parliament of Zimbabwe 
Hansard
4.2.2. Number of people that have 
access to early warning and 
conflict prevention mechanisms.
Baseline: 350 (2020) 214 men, 
136 females
Target: 2,000,000 (2026) 
60% females, 40% males, 
20% youth
Source: National Public Service 
Commission
Women, ILO, UNFPA, 
the European UnionDP/DCP/ZWE/4DP/DCP/ZWE/4
regional human rights and treaty 
bodies’ instruments/covenants
Baseline: TBD
Target: TBD
OUTPUT 4.3. Oversight, 
electoral and parliamentary 
processes and institutions 
strengthened to promote 
inclusion, transparency and 
accountability
4.3.1. Participation in the electoral 
process measured as a percentage 
of eligible voters casting valid 
votes in gazetted elections.
Baseline: 66.1% (2018); 
54% female, 46% male
Target: 70% (2023) 70% each, 
females, males and youth
Source: ZEC 
4.3.2. Number of citizens 
participating in Parliament 
processes for effective and 
accountable law-making, oversight 
and representation.
Baseline: 6,818 citizens (2020) 
52% female, 48% male, 
30% youths
Target: 24,000 new (2026) 
70% female, male and youth
Source: Parliament of Zimbabwe 
4.3.3. Number of new laws crafted 
to include gender equality and nondiscrimination clauses in line with 
international human rights 
standards.
Baseline: 10 bills (2020)
Target: 57 bills (2024)
Source: Parliament of Zimbabwe