Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 3
III. Programme and risk management: Page: 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 7
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
I.  UNDP  within  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework 
 
1.  An emerging middle-income country and one of the world’s largest democracies, Indonesia 
has achieved remarkable progress over the last two decades. In 2018, it reached the high human 
development  category  with  a  human  development  index  (HDI)  of  0.707  and  a  ranking  of 
111 out of 189 countries and territories.1 Poverty has been halved over the past two decades, 
down to 9.8 per cent in 2018.2 However, nearly 40 per cent of the population remains vulnerable 
to  poverty,3  and  income,  gender,  and  regional  and  urban/rural  inequalities  remain  marked.4  
Those most at risk of being left behind include people living in remote islands, especially in 
Eastern Indonesia, people living with disabilities, rural and coastal communities closely tied to 
agriculture,  forestry  and  fisheries,  and  women  and  young  people  without  access  to  modern 
skills.  
2.  Despite many challenges, the status of women in Indonesian society has been improving 
gradually.  The  gender  development  index  has  slowly  increased  over  recent  years,  reaching 
0.937 in 2018 (from 0.923 in 2010), while the gender inequality index has declined from 0.451 
to 0.486 in the same period. 
3.  The Government is committed to the Sustainable Development Goals and the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development. The national mid-term development plan(2020-2024) articulates 
the  need  to  ensure  justice,  sustainability,  and  gender  equality  while  developing  a  strong, 
resilient and low-carbon economy with reduced regional inequalities.5 Having ratified the Paris 
Agreement on Climate Change, Indonesia is committed to addressing climate change and to 
reducing its emission levels 
4.  This  five-year  country  programme  is  derived  from  the  United  Nations  Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework, 2021-2025, and is based on a theory of change drawing 
on  evidence  from  the  common  country  analysis.  The  Cooperation  Framework  includes  four 
outcomes:  (a)  inclusive  human  development;  (b)  economic  transformation;  (c)  climate 
resilience; and (d) innovation for Sustainable Development Goals acceleration. 
5.  The UNDP contribution to the Cooperation Framework reflects its comparative advantages 
and the unique value proposition it brings to the United Nations development system, leading 
working groups on the Goals, climate finance, and innovation. Contributing to the Cooperation 
Framework,  UNDP  will:  (a)  apply  an  integrated  cross-sectoral  approach  that  builds 
complementarities between United  Nations technical  agencies as a  connector to  mobilize its 
wide networks with NextGen UNDP; (b) leverage innovation for new development approaches 
and solutions; (c) support public sector reform to strengthen governance effectiveness across 
government  institutions  and  support  implementation  of  the  Cooperation  Framework; 
(d) facilitate  formulation  and  implementation  of  national  and  local  development  plans  and 
policies and their alignment to the 2030 Agenda and the Goals; (e) support engagement in the 
global  development  debate  and  South-South  cooperation  on  issues  of  mutual  interest; 
(f) reposition, as part of the Decade of Action, the United Nations development system to offer 
platforms  for  Sustainable  Development  Goals  acceleration  through  new  partnerships  and 
instruments, knowledge sharing, and innovation. 
6.  The  independent  country  programme  evaluation  2020  confirms  that  UNDP  has  had 
significant influence on a range of programmes and policies through system-wide interventions 
and community-level work. The evaluation found evidence of concrete gains in the capacity of 
the Supreme Court, a stronger response to the growing phenomenon of violent extremism, and 
improvement  in  coordination  among  development  actors  in  Papua  and  West  Papua.  Health 
outcomes have improved through UNDP support to the administration of grants from the Global 
Fund  to  Fight  AIDS,  Tuberculosis  and  Malaria.  UNDP  made  notable  contributions  in 
 
1 Human Development Report, 2019. 
2 Government of Indonesia, 2018. 
3 Indonesia common country analysis, 2019. 
4 Refer to sec 1.4: Cooperation Framework, Indonesia, for socioeconomic data. 
5 Paraphrased from the national medium-term development plan, 2020-2024. 
2 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
supporting the establishment of the Peatland Restoration Agency, increasing the conservation 
of  Sumatran  tigers,  and  establishing  the  national  infrastructure  for  reducing  emissions  from 
deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+). UNDP supported the Government to raise $2 
billion from its first sovereign green Islamic bond.  
7.  As recommended by the evaluation,  UNDP will build on  its work on  emerging financial 
challenges  by  exploring  alternative  and  innovative  sources  of  financing.  To  maintain  its 
relevance, UNDP will continue to provide high-level advice and expertise in demand-driven 
areas.  Monitoring  and  evaluation  of  gender-related  outcomes  will  be  enhanced  to  obtain 
insights into the country office’s gender mainstreaming efforts. 
 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
  
8.  This  country  programme  has  been  developed  through  extensive  consultations  with  the 
Government and partners across sectors. It includes four programme priorities that are directly 
derived from the Cooperation Framework outcomes and that translate the Strategic Plan, 2018-
2021, at country level. The country programme is closely aligned to the national medium-term 
development plan, 2020-2024, and Indonesia Vision 2045.   
9.  UNDP will apply six implementation principles that focus on: (a) developing innovative 
solutions with multiplier effects across the 2030 Agenda; (b) promoting a whole-of-government 
and  whole-of-society  approach;  (c)  maximizing  synergies  through  vertical  and  horizontal 
linkages across sectors and issues; (d) prioritizing the leave no one behind agenda; (e) investing 
in enhancing gender equality; (f) acting as a global and a local partner to facilitate Indonesia’s 
aspirations at the global and regional levels. 
10.  UNDP will work with United Nations organizations in response to the 2016 quadrennial 
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the United Nations 
system (General Assembly resolution 71/243), including by implementing the common chapter 
of the strategic plans, 2018-2021, of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), UNDP, 
UNFPA and the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women 
(UN-Women).  This  will  include  working  jointly  on  social  protection,  data,  gender-based 
violence, advancing the rights of people with disabilities, disaster preparedness and response, 
and the Covid-19 response. As an integrator across the Goals, UNDP will use its expertise and 
tools  to  evaluate  the  benefits  of  alternative  policies  and  investment  decisions,  and  quantify 
economic, social and environmental benefits from investments in human development. 
Outcome 1. Inclusive human development  
11.  The  theory of change underpinning  the  UNDP contribution to this area is that  if people 
living in Indonesia, especially those at risk of being left behind, have access to quality services 
and  if  they  are  protected  from  violence,  have  increased  access  to  justice,  accountability 
mechanisms, and are able to promote tolerance, and if  they can claim and are provided with 
opportunities regardless of gender, disability or any other factor,  then progress will be made 
towards  developing  the  human  capital  needed  for  an  equitable  and  prosperous  society. 
Initiatives will contribute to several Goals, including 5, 10, 11 and 16 and will apply UNDP 
signature solutions 2, 3, 5 and 6.  
12.  UNDP will foster social cohesion through programmes that promote respect for diversity 
and the prevention of violent extremism. This work will include research to fill knowledge gaps, 
policy analysis and innovative on-the-ground actions implemented with a nation-wide network 
of over 30 religious and academic institutions active at the community level. Emphasis will be 
placed on young women’s initiatives and their role in promoting peace and tolerance narratives.  
13.  UNDP  will  support  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  Academy,  a  learning  platform 
towards  localization of  the  Goals  and  support  innovation  with  emphasis  on  law,  justice  and 
human rights. This includes support for legal aid and restorative justice processes. UNDP will 
focus on Goals acceleration in Eastern Indonesia, including Papua, by strengthening the Papua 
3 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
Platform  as  a  mechanism  for  planning,  budgeting,  coordination  and  monitoring,  involving 
government, non-government and development partners.   
14.  UNDP  will  help  expand  citizens’  participation,  through  e-governance-based  citizens’ 
feedback mechanisms, ensuring equal access to women, people with disabilities, and people 
living in remote areas. This work will be done closely with civil society organizations and will 
strengthen  transparency,  accountability  and  integrity  at  national  and  sub-national  levels, 
thereby building trust in national and local institutions. To improve the quality and quantity of 
public participation, UNDP will work closely with civil society organizations. 
15.  UNDP will invest in multi-sectoral, integrated approaches to prevent and respond to sexual 
exploitation and abuse and gender-based violence, upholding women’s legal rights and equal 
access to justice and other public services. Integrated response mechanisms and services  for 
victims of violence will be strengthened at the community level and in health facilities. 
16.  UNDP  will  continue  to  contribute  to  strengthening  service  delivery  systems  to  achieve 
national priorities, such as reducing HIV and tuberculosis incidence rates, eliminating malaria, 
and responding to Covid-19 through effective delivery of vaccines, through innovation, better 
planning,  procurement,  storage,  quality  assurance,  and  the  dissemination  of  real-time 
information across all cold chain points. 
17.  UNDP complementarities with the United Nations Office for Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 
UN-Women, and others, will drive forward a cohesive United Nations development system. 
UNDP  will  maintain  its  close  relations  with  development  partners,  including  the  European 
Union, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the GAVI Foundation and Global Fund.  
Outcome 2. Economic transformation  
18.  The theory of change underlying UNDP contributions in this outcome area is that if the 
policy environment can harness technologies, improve skills development, promote a circular 
economy to reduce the environmental impact and ensure  equitable access to energy; if women 
have equal access to economic opportunities; if small and medium-sized enterprises are enabled 
to generate livelihoods ensuring inclusion of people living with disabilities, HIV and people 
living  in  underdeveloped  regions,  then  Indonesia  will  be  able  to  accelerate  economic 
transformation for low-carbon, sustainable and inclusive growth. Actions under this outcome 
area will contribute to Goals 1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 17 and apply UNDP signature solutions 
1, 2, 5 and 6. 
19.  In  line  with  Indonesia’s  nationally  determined  contributions,  UNDP  will  initiate  the 
development of innovative economic models, such as  a circular economy, to create jobs and 
increase private sector investments and profits, with a focus on the five subsectors of food and 
beverages, textiles and apparel, automotive, and chemicals. It will contribute to prioritizing and 
financing  a  low  carbon  economy  and  develop  integrated  models  for  green  growth  through 
programmes  such  as  the  Partnership  for  Acton  on  Green  Economy  (PAGE)  with  the 
International  Labour  Organization  (ILO)  and  the  United  Nations  Industrial  Development 
Organization (UNIDO). Regulatory bottlenecks will be addressed through the twin strategies 
of  partnering  with  the  Government  and  the  private  sector  to  attract  new  investments  and 
mainstream  responsible  business  and  human  rights  in  the  corporate  sector,  especially  in the 
post-Covid-19 recovery phase. 
20.  UNDP will contribute to improving carbon market preparedness, access to clean energy 
for  local  development  and  communities,  and  adoption  of  sustainable  technologies  such  as 
electric cars. UNDP will also assist in the identification of bankable energy projects and their 
de-risking under the Sustainable Development Goals Indonesia One Fund established by the 
Government. UNDP will focus on ensuring an inclusive energy transition, targeting deprived 
communities and improving energy sources, such as solar and micro-hydro power plants with 
a focus on the poorest parts of the country. 
21.  To harness benefits of Industry 4.0, or the fourth industrial revolution, UNDP will partner 
with the Government, private sector and civil society to forecast future  labour needs for new 
types  of  jobs  and  skills  needed  to  adapt  existing  jobs.  Together  with  United  Nations 
4 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
organizations, UNDP will support skills development through training systems that continually 
adapt and re-train workers, with targeted initiatives and incentives for women and girls, and 
introduce a culture of re-skilling among job seekers.  
22.  UNDP  will  assist  partners  to  strengthen  micro,  small  and  medium-size  enterprises 
(MSMEs) sector through policy analysis, design and implementation of regulatory frameworks 
for an ecosystem of start-ups, a creative economy and easier access to financing for MSMEs 
and  social  enterprises,  especially  those  headed  by  women.  It  will  prioritize  the  skills 
development  of  young  and  women  entrepreneurs,  including  those  from  Eastern  Indonesia, 
through  bootcamps  for  start-ups  and  the  ImpactAim  Venture  Accelerator  that  enables  the 
growth of social enterprises.  
23.  UNDP will support poverty eradication efforts  through a multi-dimensional approach to 
reduce  vulnerabilities  of  people  slipping  back  into  poverty,  linking  poverty  to  governance, 
environment  protection  and  climate  adaptation,  and  strengthening  systems  for  improved 
delivery of services. It will focus on disadvantaged areas by restoring local livelihoods through 
the rehabilitation of productive infrastructure and the strengthening of local value chains, with 
an  emphasis  on  leaving  no  one  behind.  UNDP  will  prioritize  projects  for  local  economic 
development and access to markets in poor districts in Papua and West Papua.     
Outcome 3. Resilience to climate change and disasters  
24.  UNDP contributions to this outcome are guided by the underlying theory of change that if 
policies and institutions address environmental concerns and reduce  the impact of geological 
and climate-induced disasters, and if effective use of  resilience-building systems is established, 
there will then be increased sustainability in natural resources management and adaptation to 
climate change, reduced greenhouse gas emissions through low carbon development strategies 
and reduced land degradation, enhanced management of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and 
habitats, and strengthened preparedness for and resilience to disasters. The UNDP contribution 
of resources and expertise to the achievement of this outcome is aligned with Goals 1, 2, 5, 7, 
8, 13, 14 and 15 and UNDP signature solutions 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6.  
25.  UNDP will support the reconstruction and recovery of disaster-affected areas, including 
areas struck by the earthquake and tsunami in 2018. As a member of the humanitarian country 
team, UNDP will contribute to disaster preparedness at national and local levels, with focus on 
people living with disabilities and women. In partnership with the United Nations Office for 
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the National Disaster Agency, UNDP 
will  work  to  ensure  effective  humanitarian-development  transition  by  focussing  on 
strengthening  the  capacity  of  disaster  authorities  and  the  public,  through  gender-responsive 
disaster management. 
26.  UNDP  will  help  restore  and  protect  land  and  marine  ecosystems  through  strengthened 
management of protected areas for the conservation of threatened species and sustainable land-
use  practices  and  livelihoods  through  nature-based  tourism,  promoting  local  wisdom  and 
addressing illegal wildlife trade. UNDP will assist communities to improve social, economic 
and  ecological  resilience  and  adaptive  seascape  management  in  coastal  areas.  UNDP  will 
support a transboundary response to over-exploited marine resources and the rising pressures 
on the globally significant biodiversity in the region of Arafura and Timor seas.  
27.  UNDP will support green commodities, sustainable crops and supply chains for palm oil, 
coffee, cocoa, cashew and rice to encourage climate mitigation by preventing loss of forests. 
UNDP will support platforms for the formulation and implementation of policies and national 
actions  plans  for  sustainable  farming.  UNDP  will  assist  rural  farming  communities  facing 
climate  change-related  risks  through  a  long-term  strategy  for  climate  change  adaptation, 
capacity  building  and  access  to  finance  for  small  holding  farmers  to  adopt  climate  smart 
agricultural practices. 
28.  Key counterparts for outcomes 2 and 3 will include the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry 
of Development Planning, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Industry, the Ministry of 
5 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
Commerce, the Ministry of Environment and Forestry, local governments and a large network 
of  civil  society  organizations,  business  associations,  entrepreneurs,  investors,  academia  and 
training institutions in Indonesia and abroad.  
Outcome  4.  Innovations  for  accelerating  the  achievement  of  Sustainable  Development 
Goals 
29.  The theory of change underpinning the UNDP contribution to this outcome area is that if 
business-as-usual  approaches  are  replaced  with  innovative  processes  and  partnerships,  if  a 
robust digital infrastructure is in place,  if investments are made in innovations that have  the 
ability  to  overcome  physical  and  locational  constraints,  then  an  inclusive  and  sustainable 
growth paradigm can be harnessed for improving the lives of people, especially those most at 
risk of being left behind. UNDP contributions under this outcome area align particularly with 
Goals 9, 13 and 17 and across all six signature solutions of UNDP.  
30.  In  line  with  the  Addis  Ababa  Action  Agenda  on  financing  for  development  and  the 
Secretary-General’s Strategy and Road Map for Financing the 2030 Agenda, UNDP, together 
with  the  United  Nations  Economic  and  Social  Commission  for  Asia  and  the  Pacific 
(UNESCAP)  and  UN-Women  will  support  the  Government  in  developing  an  integrated 
national financing framework, to implement targeted policies and reforms in order to reach the 
Goals. 
31.  The UNDP Innovative Financing Lab will continue to leverage new finance flows and to 
pilot and scale up mechanisms such as blended finance, green/blue finance, religious/Islamic 
finance and social impact investments. UNDP will support the Sustainable Development Goals 
Financing  Hub  of  the  Government  and  financing  instruments  such  as  the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  Impact  Fund  and  Social  Impact  Bonds.  As  a  platform,  the  UNDP 
Innovative  Financing  Lab  will  address  policy  issues  to  leverage  international  financing 
institutions and private sector capital and to improve transparency in financing policies. 
32.  UNDP will explore the use of big data and disruptive technologies in association with Pulse 
Lab Jakarta, United Nations partners, academic and science institutions to develop real-time 
insights into issues relevant to the country programme. Innovative technology solutions will be 
tested and adopted for improved public service delivery, such as immunization, post-Covid-19 
recovery,  climate  and disaster risk management and preparedness, and reduction of harmful 
chemicals. 
33.  In partnership with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, UNDP will support South-South and 
triangular cooperation and global and regional development exchanges. UNDP will assist the 
Indonesian Aid Agency established in 2019 with institutional capacity building and enhanced 
effectiveness  of  national  development  cooperation.  UNDP  will  also  support  Indonesia  as  a 
champion  of  innovative  finance  on  the  international  development  stage  through  global  and 
regional events. 
 
III.   Programme and risk management 
34.  The country programme outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the 
primary  unit  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board  for  results  alignment  and  resources 
assigned  to  the  programme  at  country  level.  Accountabilities  of  managers  at  the  country, 
regional  and  headquarter  levels  with  respect  to  country  programmes  is  prescribed  in  the 
organization’s  programme  and  operations  policies  and  procedures  and  internal  control 
framework. 
35.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced  by  direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with 
other  United  Nations  organizations  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned 
projects.  
6 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
36.  Donor  funding  may  reduce  owing  to  the  emerging  middle-income  status  of  Indonesia. 
UNDP  will  adopt  a  diversification  approach  to  resource  mobilization,  through  renewed 
partnerships with donors at country and regional level, increased private sector engagement, 
pursuing  Government  financing  and  fostering  new  partnerships.  UNDP  will  ensure  that  its 
business processes are efficient and cost-effective, and the staffing structure is fit-for-purpose. 
37.  Disasters  may  reduce  ability  of  communities  and  stakeholders  to  stay  engaged  in 
development initiatives. Mitigating actions will include disaster preparedness and  a business 
continuity plan for uninterrupted programme delivery developed with United Nations partners, 
government  and  communities.  Risk  management  will  include  re-programming  options  as 
required.  
38.  A Covid-19 response and recovery initiative will be implemented in partnership with the 
Government  and  United  Nations  partners,  and  across  outcome  areas.  This  will  support 
initiatives  which  mitigate  risks  of  reduced  budgetary  allocations,  prevent  the  spread  of 
infection, strengthen resilience of health systems and multi-sectoral coordination, and mitigate 
socioeconomic  impact  on  vulnerable  groups.  Digital  solutions  and  big  data  analysis  will  be 
applied to enhance the national response. 
39.  Regular  monitoring  of  the  political  economy  will  inform  modifications  in  the  theory  of 
change, while adhering to  the  UNDP  social and  environmental  standards and  accountability 
mechanism. UNDP will use risk monitoring as a tool for early warning, risk management, risk 
mitigation and decision making.  
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
 
40.  In alignment with the Cooperation Framework and the national five-year plan, UNDP will 
use national data for reporting. In case of challenges with specific national data sets, national 
statistical  capacities  will  be  enhanced  in  partnership  with  United  Nations  organizations. 
Innovative methods will be used for monitoring and to support real-time decision making.  
41.  Annual  planning  and  multi-year  goal  setting  will  be  undertaken  in  partnership  with  the 
Government. For monitoring, UNDP will support implementing partners to collect local data 
through  spot  visits  and  surveys.  The  evaluation  plan  indicates  key  project,  programme  and 
thematic evaluations to be undertaken, as per guidelines to ensure learning and accountability. 
42.  Gender-related interventions and their monitoring will be supported by an investment of at 
least 15 per cent of the programme budget. At least 1 per cent each of the total budget will be 
made available for monitoring, evaluation and communication of results, and promoting policy 
dialogue. A multi-year research agenda will produce policy and issues briefs, discussion papers 
and periodic reports. 
 
 
7 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Indonesia (2021-2025) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Economic resilience; human resources development; strengthen politic, law and security stability; and public services transformation. 
UNSDCF1 Outcome 1/UNDP OUTCOME 1: People living in Indonesia, especially those at risk of being left furthest behind, are empowered to fulfil their human 
development potential as members of a pluralistic, tolerant, inclusive and just society, free of gender and all other forms of discrimination. 
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome 2  
INDICATIVE 
RESOURCES 
(United States 
dollars) 
UNSDCF OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S) 
DATA SOURCE, 
FREQUENCY 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS  
MAJOR PARTNERS  
Indicator 1.1. 
(Goal 16.5.1(a)) Anti-
corruption behaviour 
index  
Baseline: 3.70 (2019) 
Target: 4.14 (2025) 
Statistics Indonesia  
(annual) 
Output 1.1. Public institutions are capable of responsive, inclusive, 
participatory and representative decision-making (Strategic Plan 
output 1.1.1) 
Regular: $668,100  
Other: $14.47 
million 
Ministries of Health, 
National Development 
Planning, Religious 
Affairs, State Apparatus 
and Bureaucracy 
Reform; Coordinating 
Ministry for Human 
Development, 
Coordinating Ministry 
for Political, Legal and 
Security affairs; 
National Counter 
Terrorism Agency, 
District and sub-district 
government 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1. Percentage of citizen satisfaction rate, including for 
people with disabilities, with the national integrated complaint handling 
system 
Baseline 2020: 72%  
Target 2025: 90%  
Data source: Ministry of Administrative and Bureaucracy Reforms 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2. Index of 
religious harmony  
Baseline: 73.8 (2019) 
Target: 75.8 (2025) 
Ministry of 
Religious Affairs 
(annual) 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of provinces with capacities to accelerate 
Sustainable Development Goals localization in the Decade of Action 
Baseline 2020: 3  
Target 2025: 8  
Data source: Ministry of National Development Planning 
 
 
Indicator 1.3. 
Prevalence of violence 
against women of age 
15-64 years in the last 12 
months 
Baseline: 9.4% (2016)  
Target: 6% (2025) 
Statistics Indonesia 
(once in five years) 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.3. Wider stakeholder participation to improve policy 
coherence across different levels/sectors working on Tanah-Papua 
development acceleration 
Baseline 2020: 2 (Very partially: Existing Papua Platform functions only 
at national level and consists only of government and development 
partners) 
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: Platform to include private sector and CSOs, 
made functional at subnational level) 
Data source: Approved meeting minutes  
UN-Women, UNODC, 
The Joint United 
Nations Programme om 
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), 
the World Health 
Organization (WHO), 
UNFPA, United 
Nations Volunteers 
(UNV) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework. 
 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
Output 1.2. national and subnational level capacities strengthened to 
promote inclusive local development and service delivery (Strategic 
Plan output 1.2.1) 
Organizations working on 
Islamic education and socio-
religious development in 
Indonesia, Lembaga 
Bantuan Hukum Masyarakat 
(the Community Legal Aid 
Institute), Indonesia AIDS 
Coalition 
 
Indicator 1.2.1. Systems in place for quality assurance and financial 
management of Global Fund programmes 
Baseline 2020: 2 (Very partially: Financial management information 
system deemed obsolete) 
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: Quality of financial reporting meets Global 
Fund standards) 
Data source: Global Fund secretariat  
 
 
Indicator 1.2.2. Percentage of community health centres reports of 
stockouts of immunization vaccines in the past six months  
Baseline 2020: 50%  
Target 2025: 75%  
Data source: Ministry of Health 
 
Indicator 1.2.3. Integrated service delivery in place to prevent and 
respond to sexual and gender-based violence 
Baseline 2018: 2 (Very partially: Enabling legislation exists)  
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: Multi-sectoral services, including justice and 
security upscaled platforms for raising awareness and social mobilization 
initiated) 
Data source: Ministry of Women and Child Protection, National 
Commission on Women  
 
Output 1.3. Enhanced regulatory framework and community 
awareness to promote sustainable peace and social cohesion 
(Strategic Plan output 3.2.1) 
 
Indicator 1.3.1. Regulatory frameworks available for implementation of 
national plans of action for peacebuilding and prevention of violent 
extremism 
Baseline 2019: 3  
Target 2025: 6 
Data source: Ministry of Education, National Counter Terrorism Agency  
 
Indicator 1.3.2. Number of enabling mechanisms for civil society 
contribution to sustainable peace  
Baseline 2020: 2 (Very partially: Limited communication forums)  
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: (a) Early warning system in three cities and 
20 institutions; and (b) Social media platforms for countering extremist 
narratives)) 
9 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
Data source: Ministry of Education, Ministry of Religious Affairs, 
National Counter Terrorism Agency, digital analytics reports  
 
Indicator 1.3.3. Cumulative number of citizens who participated in 
learning and communication initiatives on prevention of violent 
extremism 
Baseline 2020: 8,000,000  
Target 2025: 12,000,000  
Data source: digital analytics reports, attendance sheets 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Economic resilience 
UNSDCF Outcome 2/UNDP OUTCOME 2: Institutions and people contribute more effectively to advance a higher value-added and inclusive economic transformation. 
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome 2  
Regular: $445,400  
Other: $26.37 
million 
Indicator 2.1. 
(Goal 9.2.1) Proportion 
of value added from the 
non-oil and gas 
manufacturing sector to 
gross domestic product  
Baseline: 17.6% (2019) 
Target: 18.9% (2025)  
Statistics Indonesia 
(annual) 
Output 2.1. Vulnerable groups supported to build productive 
capacities and to benefit from sustainable livelihoods 
(Strategic Plan output1.1.2) 
Ministries of 
Environment and 
Forestry, Industry, 
Agriculture, Marine 
Affairs and Fisheries, 
Energy, Youth and 
Sports, Coordinating 
Economic Affairs; 
National Agency for 
Technology Assessment 
and Application 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of value chains strengthened at subnational 
levels 
Baseline 2020: 1 
Target 2025: 4  
Data source: Project steering committee reports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2. 
(Goal 8.10.1(b)) 
Proportion of MSMEs 
that have access to 
financial services  
Baseline: 24.7% (2019) 
Target:  30.8 (2025) 
Financial Services 
Authority (annual) 
 
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of small-holding farmers benefitting from 
financial inclusion 
Baseline 2020: 0 
Target 2025: 150,000  
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
 
 
The United Nations 
Environment 
Programme (UNEP), 
UNIDO, International 
Fund for Agricultural 
Development (IFAD), 
the Food and 
Agriculture 
Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO), 
UNOPS, the United 
Nations Capital 
Development Fund 
(UNCDF), UNICEF, 
The World Bank, 
UNFPA, UNV 
 
 
 
 
 
Statistics Indonesia 
(annual) 
Indicator 2.1.3. Number of businesses, led by young people, which 
accelerate their capacity to create Sustainable Development Goals impact  
Baseline 2019: 30 
Target 2025: 150 
Data source: Country office and partner monitoring reports 
 
Indicator 2.3. 
(Goal 10.1.1*) Gini 
coefficient 
Baseline: 0.382 (2019) 
Target: 0.360 (2025)  
 
 
 
 
 
Statistics Indonesia 
(annual) 
Output 2.2. National counterparts have enhanced technical capacities 
to formulate and implement future strategies (Industry 4.0, circular 
economy) that are inclusive and job rich 
(Strategic Plan output1.1.2) 
 
Indicator 2.4. 
(Goal 8.5.2*) 
Unemployment rate by 
sex  
Baseline: 5.28%, 5.26% 
(F), 5.40% (M) (2019) 
Target: 4.34% (2025)  
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.1. Policy preparedness to implement circular economy.  
Baseline 2020: 2 (Very partially: Analytical report on potential of 
introducing circular economy) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
Ministry of Energy 
and Mineral 
Resources 
(annual) 
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: Existence of national circular economy strategy 
and action plan) 
Data source: Analysis report; endorsed action plan 
Indicator 2.5. 
(Goal 7.3.1*) Primary 
energy intensity 
(constant price 2010, 
BoE billion Rupiah) 
Baseline: 141 (2019) 
Target: 133.8 (2025) 
Platform Usaha Sosial, 
Indonesian Future 
Leaders, Plan 
International  
 
Indicator 2.2.2. Extent to which regulatory frameworks for responsible 
business are implemented  
Baseline 2011: 2 (Very partially: regulation decreed by govts) 
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: self-assessments by private sector and informal 
negotiations for conflict settlements established) 
Data source: Coordinating Ministry of Economic Affairs, self-
assessment reports, CSO reports 
 
 
 
 
financial institutions, 
energy sector 
corporations, air 
conditioning and cooling 
system industries, 
artisanal and small-scale 
gold miners, fashion and 
textile industries, plastic 
manufacturers, Chamber 
of Commerce  
 
 
 
Indicator 2.6. 
Percentage of renewable 
energy in national energy 
mix 
Baseline: 8.55% (2019) 
Target: 23% (2025) 
Ministry of Energy 
and Mineral 
Resources 
(annual) 
 
Indicator 2.2.3. Extent to which institutions are prepared to harness the 
development potential of Industry4.0 for SME-friendly growth pathways. 
Baseline: 2 (Very partially: Sector-wide information on impact of 
artificial intelligence/automation available) 
Target: 4 (Largely: Digital infrastructure available, regulatory obstacles 
addressed, micro and macro-policies for harnessing opportunities, and 
increased budget for ICT and science, technology, engineering and math 
(STEM) education, especially for girls) 
Data source: Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
 
 
 
Output 2.3. Low emission and climate-resilient objectives addressed 
in development plans and policies to promote economic 
diversification and green growth  
(Strategic Plan output 2.1.1) 
 
Indicator 2.3.1. Fourth National Communication submitted to the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
Baseline 2019: No/Not available, only the Third National 
Communication is completed 
Target 2023: Yes, the Fourth National Communication completed 
Data source: Ministry of National Development Planning 
 
Indicator 2.3.2. Number of strategies for sustainable market diffusion of 
renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies 
Baseline 2020: 1 
Target 2025: 5 
Data source: Agreements with financial service providers 
 
Indicator 2.3.3. Number of people with access to sustainable energy 
Baseline 2020: 562,885  
Target 2025: 697,725  
Data source: Minister of Energy 
11 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Climate and disaster resilience  
UNSDCF Outcome 3/UNDP OUTCOME 3: Institutions, communities and people actively apply and implement low carbon development, sustainable natural resources 
management, and disaster resilience approaches that are all gender sensitive. 
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome 3 – Resilience 
National Disaster 
Management 
Agency (annual) 
Output 3.1. Gender-responsive measures in place for conservation, 
and sustainable use of natural resources, biodiversity and ecosystems 
(Strategic Plan output 2.4.1) 
Regular: $445,400  
Other: $131.17 
million 
Indicator 3.1.  
Number of high disaster 
risk provinces  
Baseline: 18 (2019) 
Target: 15 (2025) 
Ministries of Environment 
and Forests, Industry, 
Marine Affairs and 
Fisheries, Agriculture, 
Energy and Mineral 
Resources; National 
Development Planning 
Agency, National Disaster 
Management Agency, 
National Agency for 
Technology Assessment 
and Application  
 
 
 
Indicator 3.1.1. Greenhouse gas emissions mitigated from reduced 
deforestation  
Baseline 2017: approximately 650 million metric tons (deforestation rate 
1 million hectares/year) 
Target 2025: approximately 35 million metric tons annually  
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forests 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2. 
(Goal 13.2.1*) Biennial 
Update Report Indonesia  
Baseline: 2 (2019) 
Target: 4 (2025) 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Forestry 
Frequency (once in 
two years) 
 
Indicator 3.1.2. Reliable data on density of key endangered species 
available 
Baseline 2020: 2 (Very partially: Density data on 25 endangered species 
scattered, not standardized) 
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: Improved data quality of five key endangered 
species available) 
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
 
 
Indicator 3.3. 
(Goal 14.5.1*) Total area 
of marine conservation 
(million hectares) 
Baseline: 22.7 (2019) 
Target: 26.9 (2025) 
 
 
 
UNEP, FAO, UNIDO, 
UNV 
Ministry of 
Environment and 
Forestry 
(annual) 
 
Partnerships in 
environmental management 
for the seas of East Asia  
 
 
 
Indicator 3.1.3. Number of men and women who have benefitted from 
improved governance of commodities productions at land and sea 
Baseline (2019): 10,133 (30% women) 
Target 2025: 229,970 (30% women)  
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forests, Ministry of Maritime 
Affairs and Fisheries 
 
 
 
IKEA, Unilever, Trans 
Jakarta, Blue Birds, Ocean 
Clean Up 
 
 
Output 3.2. Strengthened and expanded protection, governance and 
management of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, habitats and 
species (Strategic Plan output1.4.1) 
 
Indicator 3.2.1. Non-protected areas brought under improved 
management for conservation and sustainable use 
Baseline 2020: 42 million hectares of forest area with high value of 
biodiversity not protected 
Target 2025: 1 million hectares of forest outside protected area is 
designated as essential ecosystem area 
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
 
Indicator 3.2.2. Advance progress in fisheries sector towards globally 
recognized certification  
12 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
Baseline: 2 (Very partially: Negligible progress in fisheries sector toward 
sustainable certification)  
Target: 4 (Largely: Preparedness of three fisheries towards certification) 
Data sources: http://www.fisheryprogress.org  
 
Indicator 3.2.3. Ecosystem approach to fisheries management score for 
fisheries management area in Arafura sea 
Baseline 2019:  167 (moderate) 
Target 2025:  250 (good) 
Data source: Directorate General of Marine, Coasts and Small Islands 
 
Output 3.3. Strengthened preparedness of institutions and 
communities to climate change and disasters risks, including 
deployment of sustainable solutions 
(Strategic Plan output 3.3.1) 
 
Indicator 3.3.1. Improved multi-hazard risk assessment and mapping 
Baseline 2020: 2 (Very partially: emphasis only on risks related to 
geological disasters, flooding) 
Target 2025: 4 (Largely: convergence methodology adopted (risks and 
vulnerabilities from geological and climate induced disasters combined))  
Data source: Indonesian risk assessment information, National Disaster 
Management Authority 
  
Indicator 3.3.2. Number of high-risk districts capacitated to identify, 
implement and monitor locally appropriate risk management solutions, 
including for women and people living with disabilities  
Baseline 2020: 12  
Target 2025: 22  
Data source: Indonesia disaster risk index, National Disaster 
Management Authority 
  
Indicator 3.3.3. Number of farmers who benefit from adaptive farming 
technology and access to credit and market for climate smart agriculture 
Baseline 2020: 5,864 (20% women) 
Target 2025: 250,000 (40% women) 
Data source: Ministry of Economic Affairs 
 
Output 3.4. Conservation and resilience strategies with local 
priorities (income and food security) contribute to global 
environment benefits (Strategic Plan output 2.4.1) 
 
13 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
Indicator 3.4.1. Number of adaptive landscape management strategies 
that build social, economic and ecological resilience tested/adopted at the 
district level 
Baseline 2020: 4  
Target 2025: 10 
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry  
 
Indicator 3.4.2. Number of Innovative incentives tested to reduce long-
term threat or actual estate-crop driven deforestation operational                
Baseline 2020: 0   
Target 2025: 2 
Data source: Ministry of Environment and Forestry 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Economic resilience; human resources development; climate and disaster resilience 
UNSDCF Outcome 4/UNDP OUTCOME 4: Stakeholders adopt innovative and integrated development solutions to accelerate advancement towards the Sustainable 
Development Goals 
STRATEGIC PLAN Outcome: Outcome 1 
Regular: $668,100  
Other: $7.57 
million 
Indicator  4.1.  Rank  of 
global innovation index 
Baseline: 85 (2019) 
Target: 75 (2025) 
World Intellectual 
Property 
Organization 
(annual) 
Output 4.1. Stronger alignment of existing financial flows and new 
investors with sustainable development initiatives in Indonesia 
(Strategic Plan output 2.5.1) 
Indonesia AID; 
Ministries of Foreign 
Affairs, Finance, 
Industry, Health, Social 
Affairs; National 
Agency for Technology 
Assessment and 
Application, National 
Zakat Agency  
 
 
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of blended financing initiatives initiated 
Baseline 2020: 4  
Target 2025: 9 
Data source: Innovative Financing Lab 
 
 
Indicator 4.2. 
(Goal 9.5.1) Proportion 
of expenditure on 
research and 
development in the 
national budget 
Baseline: 0.25% (2019) 
Target: 0.42% (2025) 
 
UNESCO Institute 
for Statistics 
(annual) 
  
Indicator 4.1.2. Number of religious institutions contributing to 
Sustainable Development Goals funding gap 
Baseline 2020: 2 
Target 2025: 6 
Data source: Signed agreements 
 
 
 
 
 
OCHA, UNICEF, 
UNEP, UN-Women, 
UNIDO, UNCDF, 
WFP, UNV 
 
Indonesian Aid 
(annual) 
 
Indicator 4.3. 
(Goal 17.9.1) Value of 
financial and technical 
assistance through South-
South and triangular 
cooperation (in trillions 
of rupiah)  
Baseline: 112 (2019) 
Target: 190 (2025) 
 
Indicator 4.1.3. Volume of resources for Sustainable Development Goals 
raised through innovative public and private financing (billions of United 
States dollars) 
Baseline 2019: 2.06 
Target 2025: 4  
Data source: signed agreements 
 
 
 
Alliance of Indigenous 
Community Indonesia, 
organizations working 
on disability issues 
 
 
Output 4.2. Policy environment strengthened to expand public and 
private financing for the Sustainable Development Goals (Strategic 
Plan output 2.1.1) 
 
 
 
 
banks and financial 
institutions 
 
14 
 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
Indicator 4.2.1. Number of financing schemes initiated to support green, 
low-emission and sustainable development 
Baseline 2020: 3  
Target 2025: 8 
Data source: Various ministries 
 
Indicator 4.2.2. Percentage of government and private sector officials 
satisfied with trainings for localizing the Sustainable Development Goals 
Baseline 2020: TBD   
Target 2025: 80% (of total 30000 trained, 30%women) 
Data source:  Pre/post training surveys 
 
Output 4.3. Innovative technology solutions adopted for improved 
public service delivery (Strategic Plan output 3.1.1) 
 
Indicator 4.3.1. Number of provincial governments using technology for 
delivery of immunization services  
Baseline 2020: 10  
Target 2025: 34  
Data source: Ministry of Health 
 
Indicator 4.3.2. Number of technological solutions for climate and 
disaster risk management and preparedness adopted by target groups, 
including people living with disabilities 
Baseline 2020: 1  
Target 2025: 5 
Data source: Mobile application stores, digital platforms   
 
Indicator 4.3.3. Number of technology solutions used for management of 
harmful chemicals  
Baseline 2020: 3  
Target 2025: 6 
Data source: Ministries of Industry, Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry 
 
Output 4.4. Partnerships strengthened for innovative and inclusive 
South-South and triangular cooperation 
(Strategic Plan output 1.1.1) 
 
Indicator 4.4.1. Number of regulatory frameworks available for 
governance of the Indonesian International Development Cooperation  
Baseline 2020: 3 
Target 2025:  7  
Data source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
15 
DP/DCP/IDN/4 
 
 
 
/3 
Indicator  4.4.2.  Number  of  thematic  South-South  and  triangular 
cooperation platforms functional  
Baseline 2020: 2  
Target 2025: 6 
Data Source: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance  
 
Indicator  4.4.3.  Number  of  countries  receiving  technical  support  from 
centres of excellence for disaster management 
Baseline 2020: 6   
Target 2025: 36 
Data source: National Disaster Management Authority 
 
 
16 
