Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework 
 
1.  The UNDP country programme is aligned with National Development Plan of Ecuador, 
2021-2025, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-
2025, and the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 2022-2026. 
2.  Before  the  coronavirus  (COVID-19)  pandemic,  the  economy  of  Ecuador  experienced 
high levels of indebtedness and a recession associated with declines in the price of oil and 
other  commodities.  Several  social  indicators  showed  regressive  trends.1  The  pandemic 
exacerbated socioeconomic inequalities, with a 7.8 per cent decrease in the gross domestic 
product  in  2020,2  together  with  poverty  and  extreme  poverty  indicators,  which  stood  at 
27.7 per cent  and  10.5  per  cent,  respectively,  as  of  December  2021.3  Multidimensional 
poverty increased to 19.7 per cent nationwide, and 38.4 per cent in rural areas, in 2021. The 
adequate  employment  rate4  is  32.7  per  cent  (lower  for  women,  youth  and  rural  sectors);5 
66 per cent of women in the labour force do not have social security. COVID-19 vaccination 
rates soared to 83.25 per cent for the population over three years of age as of May 2022;6 
representing a notable contribution to socioeconomic recovery. In fiscal terms, the recent rise 
in oil prices represents an opportunity for the country to invest in socioeconomic development 
and a more diversified, less fuel-dependent economy.  
3.  Women  constitute  39  per  cent  of  parliamentarians  and  only  8.1 per cent  of  local 
governments. In addition to gender inequities and the challenges facing youth, socioeconomic 
indicators reflect inequalities for the indigenous, Afro-Ecuadorian, and Montubio populations 
compared  to  the  mestizo  majority.7  People  in  situations  of  human  mobility,  mainly  from 
Venezuela, are estimated to exceed 510,000, and there are more than 70,000 refugees, mainly 
from Colombia.8 
4.  Violence and crime rates increased 80 per cent between 2020 and 2021, and the homicide 
rate  doubled  over  the  same  period.9  The  increase  in  violence  and  citizen  insecurity  was 
associated with organized crime and the incursion of drug cartels. Six out of 10 women in 
Ecuador  have  suffered  some  violence.  The  protests  that  occurred  in  2019,  led  by  the 
indigenous movement, laid bare the social unrest and polarization of the country, a situation 
that was repeated in 2022. Inequalities, social fractures, and the exacerbation of racism must 
be  addressed  with  pluralistic  dialogues  and  policies  of  inclusion,  social  cohesion,  and 
reconciliation. 
5.  Environmental  challenges  include  climate  change,  biodiversity  loss,  soil  degradation, 
pollution,  and  water  resource  management.  There  has  been  progress  in  implementing  the 
nationally  determined  contribution,  although  adaptation  remains  a  challenge.  The  main 
greenhouse  gas-emitting  sector  is  energy,  followed  by  changes  in  land  use.  Although  the 
deforestation rate decreased between 1990 and 2018, it has been calculated at 82,529 ha/year 
for the 2016-2018 period, leading to loss of biodiversity and the deterioration of ecosystem 
services.10  
6.  The  challenges  faced  by  Ecuador  include  improving  social  protection,  increasing  the 
coverage and quality of public services, improving the quality of employment, and ensuring 
inclusive and sustainable growth while guaranteeing the full enjoyment of human rights and 
human security conditions.  
 
1 National Development Plan (NDP), 2021 
2 Central Bank of Ecuador, 2022 
3National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC), 2022 
4 Earning minimum salary, working 40 hours or less. 
5  INEC, 2022 
6 Ministry of Public Health,2022 
7 INEC, 2021 
8 Refugee and Migration Working Group, 2022. 
9 Ministry of Government, 2022. 
10 Common country analysis, 2021 
2/14 
22-27504 
 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
7. 
In citizen security, anti-corruption, and the promotion of citizen participation, UNDP has 
worked  to  strengthen  planning,11  public  management  and  innovation,  and  territorial 
articulation.  UNDP  has  worked  with  the  United  Nations  Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime 
(UNODC)  to  foster  transparency  and  integrity.  In  the  next  cycle,  institutional  and  social 
capacities will be strengthened for social cohesion, dialogue, reconciliation, and reduction of 
all forms of violence and threats to human security. 
8. 
In  economic  development,  UNDP  has  worked  on  inclusive,  green  recovery  and  the 
socioeconomic inclusion of migrants and refugees, focusing on digitalization in the context 
of the pandemic and promoting South-South cooperation.  
9.  Gender equality is mainstreamed throughout the UNDP programme. As a participant in 
the  United  Nations-European  Union  Spotlight  Initiative,  which  addresses  gender-based 
violence, UNDP helped develop the Single Registry of Violence. In the next cycle, UNDP 
will  continue  to  advance  policies,  institutional  frameworks,  and  information  management. 
The country office received the gender equality silver seal in 2020.  
10.  UNDP supports the Government in exploring a financing framework for development, 
including  monitoring  social  investment;  improving  tax  systems;  promoting  results-based 
budgeting; climate expenditure reviews; and green financing.  
11.  UNDP  works  with  the  Government  and  other  actors  to  generate  public  policy 
instruments and strengthen capacities for climate action; the conservation of biodiversity and 
ecosystems; sustainable forest management; circular economy; integral management of river 
basins and international waters; and environmental quality, incorporating a gender approach 
and promoting South-South cooperation. UNDP supported the development of the nationally 
determined contribution, its implementation plan – the National Adaptation Plan – and the 
Zero Carbon Programme. It is a key actor clearing the path of Ecuador towards ecological 
transition;  promoting  sustainable  and  deforestation-free  production;  fostering  the  bio-
economy  alongside  local  communities;  promoting  circular  economy  practices;  and 
generating  partnerships  with  the  private  sector,  as  well  as  with  entities  such  as  the 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the United Nations Entity for 
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women). 
12.  Over 7,000 emergencies and disasters occurred in 2020-2021, causing socioeconomic 
disruption. Working with multiple partners,  UNDP  rose to the  challenge and  incorporated 
disaster risk reduction into development plans.  
13.  Consultations  with  stakeholders 
the  United  Nations  Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework highlighted the need to strengthen public institutions, 
increase  capacities,  improve  information  management,  and  promote  better  articulation 
between  levels  of  government  and  other  sectors.  Sustainable  and  innovative  financing 
mechanisms are needed, together with a regulatory framework and public policy instruments 
supporting  poverty  reduction, 
transformation,  comprehensive  security, 
resilience,  and  ecological  transition,  defined  as  national  priorities  in  the  National 
Development Plan.12 
to  formulate 
institutional 
14.  The independent country programme evaluation, 2019-2022, indicated the capacity of 
UNDP  to  respond  to  basic  needs  during  the  pandemic.  Its  articulating  role  with  the 
United Nations  and  other  partners  allowed  the  Government  to  use  the  socioeconomic  and 
needs  assessment  methodology  to  guide  the  recovery.  UNDP  fund  management  and 
procurement efficiency have enabled it to serve the urgent needs of vulnerable populations. 
It has been a central partner for inclusive and sustainable recovery.13 Lessons learned include 
the importance of being prepared to act in the face of uncertain scenarios and impacts, use 
 
11 NDP, 2021 
12 Common country analysis, 2021 
13 Independent country programme evaluation, 2021 
22-27504 
3/14 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
forward-thinking,  and  seek  strategic  positioning  with  authorities  and  partners,  making 
catalytic use of resources. 
15.  UNDP  is  recognized  as  an  impartial  and  credible  partner  that  can  take  advantage  of 
multisectoral partnerships on a wide range of issues with a comprehensive vision.14 While it 
will  continue  to  mobilize  technical  assistance  and  resources  and  articulate  responses  to 
development challenges, greater efforts must be made to guarantee the sustainability of such 
interventions. To that end, UNDP will work on institutional strengthening to ensure better, 
more transparent public management, including anchoring actions with local actors.  
16.  The  UNDP  Accelerator  Lab  will  continue  to  research,  co-create  and  test  innovative 
methods, promoting transformative solutions. It will seek opportunities for generating public 
policies through digital technology, data use, and internet access to build inclusive, ethical 
and sustainable digital societies in line with the Digital Strategy, 2022-2025.  
17.  Under the commitment to “leave no one behind”, UNDP will work with priority attention 
groups: women, to reduce gender gaps and reduce the levels of gender-based violence; young 
people affected by unemployment and with low levels of participation; indigenous people, 
Afro-descendant  populations,  and  Montubias,  all  of  whom  experience  high  levels  of 
discrimination and racism and are over-represented in poverty figures; lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender and queer people, who face high levels of discrimination and violence; people in 
situations  of  human  mobility,  who  have  little  access  to  employment  and  services  and  are 
affected by xenophobia; and people with disabilities, who have limited access to services and 
the labour market. Partnerships with civil society and volunteer organizations, including the 
United Nations Volunteer (UNV) programme, will contribute to this commitment. 
 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
 
18.  The  UNDP  vision  for  Ecuador,  in  line  with  national  priorities,  is  for  the  country  to 
achieve  sustainable  development;  reduce  poverty  and  inequality;  improve  people’s  lives; 
foster sustainable production and consumption; and support ecological transition for a more 
crisis-resilient society, with the overarching goal of living in peace.  
19.  UNDP  will  leverage  its  comparative  advantage  and  strengthen  its  role  as  a  strategic 
partner  and  provider  of  integrated  solutions  to  help  solve  development  challenges  by 
providing  technical  assistance  for  capacity-building,  awareness-raising,  and  public  policy 
development,  knowledge  networks,  digitalization,  and  project  management.  UNDP  will 
undertake joint work with other United Nations entities and mobilize resources to achieve 
sustainable development. 
20.  The  programme  priorities  consider  the  achievements  of  the  previous  cycle  and  the 
challenges  identified  in  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework consultations carried out with the Government; other state actors; decentralized 
autonomous  governments;  civil  society;  academia;  international  cooperation  agencies;  the 
private sector; the media; and international financial organizations. A human-rights, gender 
equality,  and  intercultural  approach  will  be  applied  in  all  interventions.  South-South  and 
triangular cooperation will be mainstreamed.  
21.  The  vision  of  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan  to  accelerate  achievement  of  the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  is  incorporated  into  the  programme;  to  that  end,  it  fosters  skills  that 
include systemic thinking and a culture that accepts complexity. The Accelerator Lab will 
support  UNDP  strategies  to  transition  from  a  project  approach  to  a  portfolio  rationale. 
Solutions will be built and scaled collaboratively with third parties. 
22.  The  UNDP  proposal  to  achieve  the  results  expected  in  the  cooperation  framework 
includes: 
 
14 UNDP partnership survey, 2020 
4/14 
22-27504 
 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
Comprehensive social protection and resilience  
23.  The UNDP theory of change in this area is that if public institutions of the social sector 
and local governments have strengthened capacities, regulations, policies and instruments to 
provide inclusive social services that are non-discriminatory and gender-sensitive, then the 
implementation  of  social  protection  and  risk  management  systems  will  allow  people, 
particularly vulnerable groups, to have access to quality benefits and services so that they can 
exercise their rights, leaving no one behind, promoting human development and making them 
more resilient. 
24.  To  that  end,  UNDP  will  promote  continuity,  improvement,  evaluation,  and  greater 
articulation in policies and programmes for social protection – incorporating differentiated 
and  innovative  approaches  –  and  will  support  national  efforts  to  eradicate  poverty  while 
reducing  inequalities  and  exclusion.  It  will  strengthen  partnerships  with  the  National 
Planning Secretariat, the Ministry of Economic and Social Inclusion, the Ecuadorian Institute 
of  Social  Security,  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance,  the  Social  Registry  Unit,  the 
National Institute of Statistics and Census, the Ministry of Labour, academia, civil society, 
and volunteer organizations. The 2022 census will provide inputs for this work. A whole-of-
society  and  risk  management  approach  will  be  promoted  for  territorial  management  in 
collaboration with local governments and their associations, the National Decentralized Risk 
Management System, and the National Risk and Emergency Management Service. Emphasis 
will  be  placed  on  groups  that  are  over-represented  in  figures  related  to  inequality  and 
discrimination, persons in human mobility, indigenous people and nationalities,  Montubio 
and  Afro-descendant  populations,  women,  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and  queer 
people, young people, and disabled persons. 
25.  UNDP will articulate its actions with United Nations system partners, particularly with 
the International Labour Organization (ILO), UN-Women, and the United Nations Children’s 
Fund  (UNICEF),  and  will  strengthen  relationships  with  strategic  partners  including  the 
European Union, the World Bank and the Latin American Development Bank.  
Environmental management and climate action towards an ecological,  inclusive, and 
resilient transition 
 
26.  The UNDP theory of change in this area is that if public, private, and civil society actors 
have  the  capacities,  resources,  regulatory  frameworks  and  public  policy  instruments  to 
strengthen  national  and  local  governments,  alongside  the  promotion  and  application  of 
sustainable  production  and  consumption  models  that  revalue  nature  and  strengthen  the 
conservation of forests and biodiversity as a central element of development, then the country 
will be able to move towards an ecological transition and a sustainable and inclusive economy 
that is decarbonized and resilient to the effects of climate change. This will result in a positive 
impact on people, nature, and ecosystems, addressing the three-fold planetary crisis: climate 
change, loss of biodiversity, and pollution.  
 
27.  UNDP  will  apply  a  whole-government  approach  for  institutional  strengthening  to 
consolidate  environmental  governance  and  ecological  transition,  moving  towards  a 
development model that places nature at the centre of strategic decisions.  
 
28.  With  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment,  Water  and  Ecological  Transition  and  local 
governments, UNDP will work on capacity-building;  data generation and  systematization, 
legal  and  regulatory  frameworks,  and  public  policy;  the  consolidation  and  automation  of 
prevention,  control,  and  monitoring  mechanisms  and  systems;  and  actions  aimed  at  the 
conservation of biodiversity and marine and terrestrial ecosystems, climate action, pollution 
reduction,  inclusive  circular  economy,  and  integrated  management  of  water  resources, 
including disaster risk management. Ecuador is a signatory to 18 multilateral environmental 
agreements within which UNDP will provide technical assistance to meet the commitments 
undertaken. We will support the creation and updating of instruments such as the nationally 
determined contribution, assumed under the Paris Agreement. UNDP will continue to support 
the  country  in  accessing  resources  from  environmental  funds  and  bilateral  cooperation, 
22-27504 
5/14 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
including the Global Environment Facility, the Green Climate Fund, the European Union, 
and the UNDP Climate Promise. 
 
29.  With  the  National  Planning  Secretariat,  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance, 
decentralized autonomous governments, civil society and volunteer groups, UNDP will foster 
the national decentralized participatory planning system to integrate, implement, and finance 
environmental  and  climate  policies.  With  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  Livestock,  the 
Ministry of Production, Foreign Trade, Investments and Fisheries, the Ministry of Energy 
and  Mines  and  the  productive  sectors,  UNDP  will  foster  production  models  and 
environmentally  responsible  consumption  with  sustainable,  efficient  practices  and 
technologies, to support a more competitive industrial sector. Collaborating with public and 
private financial institutions and the Popular and Solidarity Economy (cooperative sector), 
UNDP will enable the generation of financial instruments and mechanisms that encourage 
conservation, sustainable production and use of resources, and environmentally responsible 
value chains. UNDP will continue to foster coordinated work with indigenous communities, 
peoples  and  nations,  together  with  participatory  processes  for  decision-making,  all  with  a 
focus on gender, inclusion and diversity, highlighting the contributions of indigenous women.  
 
30.  UNDP  will  continue  to  facilitate  opportunities  for  multi-stakeholder  discussions  that 
promote better interinstitutional and intersectoral articulation at the national and local levels, 
and  transboundary  ecosystems  governance,  towards  a  just,  ecological  and  sustainable 
transition. It will coordinate with other United Nations entities in institutional strengthening 
and  the  generation  of  information.  This  will  include  coordination  with  FAO,  the 
United Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP),  and  the  United  Nations  Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). To mainstream the gender, intercultural, 
and diversity approach, UNDP will coordinate with UN-Women; to integrate young people 
into decision-making processes, UNDP will work with UNICEF. In responsible production 
and consumption, UNDP will work with FAO, the World Food Programme (WFP), and the 
United Nations Organization for Industrial Development (UNIDO).  
 
Productivity, competitiveness, and inclusive, sustainable, and innovative livelihoods 
 
31.  The  UNDP  theory  of  change  in  this  area  is  that  if  public,  private,  civil  society,  and 
academic actors have a public policy, capacities, instruments and mechanisms that promote 
sustainable  economic  development  and  systemic  competitiveness  and  digitalization 
processes then the generation of livelihoods and decent work, access to financial resources, 
production means, and economic services, along with the strengthening of value chains and 
productive  transformation  with  greater  added  value,  inclusiveness,  and  environmental 
sustainability will all be fostered. This will lead to improved redistribution, the closing of 
gaps, and a reduction in socioeconomic inequalities, emphasizing priority attention groups. 
 
32.  To that end, UNDP will deepen relationships with its partners, generating conditions to 
promote inclusive and environmentally sustainable productive development; with its partners 
being the Ministry of Production, Foreign Trade, Investments and Fisheries, the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Livestock, the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Telecommunication, the 
Ministry  of  the  Environment,  Water  and  Ecological  Transition,  the  Secretariat  of  Higher 
Education,  Science,  Technology  and  Innovation,  the  Ministry  of  Labour,  economic 
development  agencies,  decentralized  autonomous  governments,  academia,  chambers  of 
commerce and guilds, and actors from the Popular and Solidarity Economy. Partnerships will 
be  maintained  to  mobilize  resources  with  the  European  Union,  Spanish  and  Italian 
Cooperation, the United States Agency for International Development, the private sector, and 
volunteer organizations. 
 
33.  UNDP will continue to promote market insertion and the financial inclusion of economic 
units  (farmers,  enterprises,  micro,  small,  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  Popular  and 
Solidarity Economy actors, and the industrial sector). The focus will be on gender equality, 
youth, populations experiencing human mobility, indigenous people, and rural populations, 
to improve their living conditions and reduce poverty rates. The systemic competitiveness of 
6/14 
22-27504 
 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
Ecuador  will  be  improved,  considering  territorial  potentialities  and  environmental 
sustainability. 
 
34.  Interagency work with UN-Women, FAO, the International Organization for Migration 
(IOM), ILO, UNIDO, and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) 
will  be  key  to  promoting  socioeconomic  equality,  facilitating  sustainable,  productive 
transformation by proposing innovative instruments, standards and mechanisms. 
 
Solid institutions guarantee rights, inclusion, social cohesion, peace, and human security 
 
35.  The UNDP theory of change in this area is that if the institutional capacity to design and 
manage  public  policies  is  strengthened,  the  processes  of  election  and  democratic 
representation are reinforced, transparency, access to public information, justice, control and 
accountability mechanisms are improved; if society, especially priority attention groups and 
those in a situation of marginalization, are empowered, participate, and influence decisions 
of public interest; if, concomitantly, capacities for dialogue, a culture of peace, and conflict 
prevention  are  strengthened,  and  threats  to  human  security  and  all  forms  of  violence, 
especially  gender-based  violence,  are  reduced,  then  people  will  be  able  to  exercise  their 
rights more fully and without discrimination, consolidating democratic governance, trust, and 
social cohesion. 
36.  UNDP will work with entities at the national and local levels in institutional reform and 
strengthening processes. It will work with the National Planning Secretariat, the Ministry of 
Economy and Finance, decentralized autonomous governments, and civil society to articulate 
planning, policies, and budgets aligned with the  National Development Plan and the 2030 
Agenda. UNDP will work with the Secretary of the Administration to apply strategies focused 
on  integrity  and  anti-corruption  and  implement  its  open-government  plan.  The  National 
Public  Procurement  Service  and  other  institutions  will  be  supported  in  improving  and 
fostering  transparency.  In  collaboration  with  the  Human  Rights  Secretariat,  the  Judicial 
Branch,  the  Electoral  Branch,  and  women’s  organizations,  UNDP  will  work  to  eradicate 
gender-based violence. Alongside public agencies, academia, the media, social organizations, 
and sex and gender diversity organizations, UNDP will promote changes in the socio-cultural 
patterns  that  constitute  the  basis  of  violence.  With  the  equality  councils,  UNDP  will 
mainstream intercultural approaches, human mobility, gender, and inclusion of people with 
disabilities.  Cooperation  with  the  National  Electoral  Council  will  continue  to  improve 
electoral  processes  and  women’s  political  participation  and  generate  conditions  for  an 
inclusive democratic representation system. Threats to human security, social and criminal 
violence, reinforcement of conflict prevention, and social dialogue will be addressed with the 
Ministry of Interior. 
37.  On governance, planning, budgets, and participation, UNDP will seek partnerships with 
UN-Women and UNICEF. On electoral issues, including disinformation threats, partnerships 
will be established with UN-Women and UNESCO under the strategic guidance of the United 
Nations Electoral Division. UNDP will coordinate with UNODC on transparency and anti-
corruption. Matters relating to security, prevention of and the fight against violence will be 
coordinated with UN-Women, UNFPA, and UNODC. Work on protecting human rights will 
be  undertaken  with  IOM,  UNHCR,  UN-Women,  the  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High 
Commissioner for Human Rights, and UNICEF.  Partnerships will be maintained to mobilize 
resources with the European Union, Spanish and bilateral cooperation. 
 
III.  Programme and risk management 
38.  This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the main unit of accountability to the Executive Board to align the outcomes and 
resources allocated to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at 
the  country,  regional,  and  headquarters  levels  with  respect  to  country  programmes  are 
prescribed in the UNDP operations and programmes policies and procedures and the internal 
control framework. 
22-27504 
7/14 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
39.  The  programme  will  be  executed  nationally.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable a response to force 
majeure. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in coordination with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the respective projects. 
40.  The  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Migration  will  oversee  the  programme.  An 
Executive Committee composed of the Ministry and UNDP will provide strategic orientation, 
monitor  results  and  support  resource  mobilization.  UNDP  will  participate  in  the 
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework Executive Committee. 
41.  The crisis caused by COVID-19 has shown that societies must improve their response 
capacities and resilience to threats. Multidimensional risks could obstruct achievement of the 
expected outcomes. The programme is designed to be a flexible and adaptive tool to mitigate 
risks and respond to emerging national priorities. 
42.  The slowdown in social development is identified as a long-term risk. UNDP will engage 
with national and local authorities to position development priorities on the public agenda, 
focusing on gender equality. Support for emergency procurement processes and accelerated 
social services will be provided. 
43.  In 2023, new sectional authorities will be elected, generating uncertainty for territorial 
development. UNDP has the experience to encourage the authorities to use tools for local 
planning and sustainable development. 
44.  The commitment of Ecuador to environmental and social sustainability will be reflected 
in  rigorously  applied  social  and  environmental  standards.  Capacities  to  avoid,  minimize, 
mitigate,  and  manage  possible  adverse  impacts  –  including  mechanisms  to  respond  to 
grievances from people who could be affected – will be reinforced, guaranteeing key players’ 
full and effective participation. 
45.  Ecuador faces multiple disaster risks such as floods, landslides, fires, volcanic activity, 
and earthquakes, which may require data analysis, coordination, and the adjustment of regular 
programmes. 
46.  The  risks  emanating  from  increased  crime,  political  instability,  conflict,  and violence 
will require ongoing analysis with the Resident Coordinator and the United Nations country 
team, demanding the capacity to adapt and respond to conditions that may affect operations. 
UNDP will assist authorities in complying with international human rights and development 
commitments and preventing the aggravation of conflict and social polarization.  
47.  Likewise, UNDP will foster digitization and innovation processes across the board and 
support the application of horizon-scanning tools to identify signs of change, possible risks, 
and emerging trends. 
48.  The  UNDP  social  and  environmental  standards  and  accountability  mechanism  will 
ensure  human  rights  and  sustainability.  Stakeholder  mapping  will  guarantee  that  the 
grievance mechanism reaches the most vulnerable. The UNDP business continuity plan will 
ensure  continuity  in  case  of  interruptions.  Programming  tools  and  the  application  of  risk 
management  instruments  will  be  used,  including  due  diligence  for  partnerships  with  the 
private sector. 
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
 
49.  Adhering to UNDP policies, rules and procedures, the programme will be monitored and 
evaluated,  promoting  accountability  and  transparency  to  ensure  effective  execution  and 
achieve the proposed results. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Migration will oversee the 
programme through the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework, 
be  carried  out  with  the  support  of  the  United  Nations  interagency  data  management, 
monitoring and evaluation group. 
8/14 
22-27504 
 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
50.  Proportionally to its projects, UNDP will allocate at least 3 per cent of the programme 
budget  to  cover  monitoring,  evaluation,  and  communication  costs.  In  agreement  with  the 
Government, an evaluation plan will be implemented to ensure learning and accountability, 
following the UNDP evaluation policy and the guidelines of the United Nations Evaluation 
Group, integrating values and human rights and gender equality principles, and bolstering the 
commitment to “leave no one behind”.  
51.  The UNDP gender marker will help identify gaps and ensure achievement of the new 
Global Gender Strategy goal of investing at least 70 per cent of total programme spending in 
gender. At least 15 per cent of the regular resources should be allocated to gender equality 
and women’s empowerment. Gender indicators will be integrated into the evaluation plan, 
and investment in GEN 2 and GEN 3 projects will be increased.  
52.  Results-based  management  will  be  applied  as  a  continuous  process,  given  the 
interconnected nature of planning, monitoring, and evaluation. UNDP will redouble its efforts 
to maintain positive results in its audits, the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers plan, 
compliance with the evaluation plan, and follow-up to the independent country programme 
evaluation recommendations. 
53.  The National Information and Evaluation System of the National Planning Secretariat 
will  be  strengthened  through  methodologies,  analysis,  and  determination  of  indicators  for 
social programmes and the Human Development Index, the use of various sources (mainly 
the 2022 National Census), and monitoring the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and its 
connection to the National Development Plan. Support will be provided to the Single Registry 
of  Violence  on  gender  violence  indicators;  consolidating  a  monitoring  system  for 
development financing and design of a tool to monitor social spending; climate budgeting; 
and  implementation  of  the  REDD+  Measures  and  Actions  Management  System  and  the 
Safeguards Information System. 
54.  These  interventions  are  expected  to  contribute  to  evidence-based  decision-making  to 
ensure  compliance  with  the  National  Development  Plan,  the  2030  Agenda,  and  the 
international commitments of Ecuador.  
 
22-27504 
9/14 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Ecuador (2023-2026) 
National priority or goal. National Development Plan (NDP) 2021-2025 O5, O6, O7, O9. Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11 
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #1. In 2026, people, taking into consideration their age, sex, gender identity, ethnic self-identification and diversity, particularly those in 
vulnerable situations and in emergency contexts, increase their equal and equitable access to social protection and quality social services, including food, health, education, water, sanitation 
and hygiene, housing, care and culture. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
Estimated 
cost by 
outcome (in 
$ thousands) 
Data source, frequency 
of data collection and 
responsibilities 
Major partners / 
partnerships / 
frameworks 
Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baseline(s), target(s) 
Indicative country programme outputs 
 (including indicators, baselines, targets) 
IMF Staff report,  
National Institute of 
Statistics and Census 
(INEC), annual  
Indicator 1.1. Percentage of families 
living in poverty (lowest 3 deciles of the 
income distribution) that receive at least 
one non-contributory social protection 
benefit. 
Baseline (2020): 60 
Target: 80 
Regular   
389.5 
Output 1.1. Public institutions have strengthened capacities, 
regulations, policies, and instruments to implement a system 
and appropriate social protection measures that allow people, 
particularly targeted priority groups, to overcome poverty and 
access quality social benefits and services, including for 
preventing disaster risk.  
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and 
Migration (MREMH) 
National Planning Secretariat 
(SNP) 
Ministry of Labour (MDT) 
Ministry of Economic and 
Social Inclusion (MIES) 
Ecuadorian Institute of Social 
Security  
Social Registry Unit (URS) 
National Risk and Emergency 
Management Service (SNGRE) 
Ministry of Economy and 
Finance (MEF) 
Decentralized autonomous 
governments (DAG) and their 
guilds 
National Assembly 
Qatar, Germany  
European Union 
World Bank 
Latin American Development 
Bank  
Academia  
Civil society organizations 
(CSOs) 
Volunteers  
Italian-Ecuadorian Fund for 
Sustainable Development  
UNICEF  
 
Other  
5,562 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1.  Number of knowledge outputs on poverty, 
social investment, social protection, gender and care that 
contribute to informed decision-making (IRRF.1.2.1) 
Baseline (2022): 5 
Target (2026): 9 
Source: UNDP, MIES, MEF annual  
 
 
Indicator 1.2. National average score for 
adopting and implementing national and 
local disaster risk reduction strategies in 
line with the Sendai Action Framework 
Baseline (2021): 0.55 
Target: 0.75 
 
United Nations Office for 
Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNDRR), annual 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of public policy strategies, 
institutional strengthening interventions and mechanisms 
supported to implement a social protection basis sensitive to 
priority groups, gender and emergencies 
Baseline (2022): 4  
Target (2026): 8 
Source: UNDP, MIES, URS annual  
 
 
Indicator 1.3. Percentage of local 
governments that adopt and implement 
policies, tools, and strategies for risk 
reduction, aligned with the Sendai 
Framework. 
Baseline (2021): 0.81 
Target: 0.85 
 
UNDRR, annual 
 
 
Output 1.2. Actors in the National Decentralized Risk 
Management System have strengthened capacities and tools 
for multidimensional risk management, response 
preparedness, recovery and resilience at national, local, and 
sectoral levels. 
 
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of strategies, plans, or public policy 
instruments developed and/or implemented at the national or 
22-27504 
10/14 
 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
local level for institutional strengthening of disaster risk 
management and resilience 
Baseline (2022): 30 
Target (2026): 53 
Source: UNDP, SNGRE, annual 
WFP  
ILO  
UNESCO  
IOM  
UNHCR  
UN-Women 
 
National priority or goal: NDP 2021-2025 O11, O12, O13. Sustainable Development Goals 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17 
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #2. In 2026, the State and society advance towards the ecological transition and a sustainable and inclusive, decarbonized and resilient 
economy to the effects of climate change, conserving biodiversity, avoiding land degradation and the pollution of ecosystems, with a focus on gender, inclusion and diversities. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions 
Indicator 2.1. Percentage of national 
territory under conservation or 
environmental management 
Baseline: 16.45 
Target: 16.45 (NDP.11.1.1.) 
Ministry of the 
Environment, Water and 
Ecological Transition 
(MAATE), annual 
Regular   
$389.5 
Output 2.1. Public, private and civil society actors have 
strengthened capacities and regulatory frameworks and 
gender-sensitive public policy instruments generated at the 
national and local levels to respond effectively to the 
challenges posed by the triple planetary crisis: climate 
change, loss of biodiversity, and pollution. 
MAATE and affiliated agencies. 
MAG   
MEM 
MPCEIP 
MEF  
MREMH 
SNGRE 
Electric sector  
Central Bank of Ecuador  
Popular and Solidarity Economy 
actors   
BanEcuador   
National Finance Corporation  
Inter-American Development 
Bank 
DAG and their guilds 
UN-Women  
UNIDO  
FAO  
UNEP 
UNICEF  
UNOPS  
WFP 
UNV 
European Union 
German Agency for International 
Cooperation  
World Wildlife Fund 
Conservation International 
The Nature Conservancy  
 
Other  
$85,576 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2. Number of action plans or 
national strategies for sustainable 
consumption and production incorporated 
as priorities or goals in national policies 
Baseline(2019): 14 
Target: Pending (SDG.12.1.1) 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of regulatory frameworks and 
public policy instruments generated that contribute to climate 
action, sustainable use and conservation of biodiversity and 
ecosystems, transboundary water management, coastal and 
marine resources, and pollution reduction 
Baseline (2022): 203 
Target (2026): 222 
Source: UNDP, MAATE, annual 
 
 
SNP, annual 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.2. Number of people with strengthened 
capacities to contribute to climate action, sustainable use and 
conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems, transboundary 
water management, coastal and marine resources, and 
pollution reduction 
Baseline (2022): Total 10,169, focused on: Women 3,051 
Target (2026): Total 14,000, focused on: Women 4,774 
Source: UNDP, MAATE, annual 
 
Output 2.2 Public, private, and civil society actors have 
adopted actions that promote sustainable production and 
consumption models, focused on a green, inclusive, and 
resilient recovery, resulting in the contribution and 
participation of women and diverse populations. 
 
11/14 
22-27504 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
Wildlife Conservation Society  
Private sector 
CSOs 
Volunteers 
 
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of initiatives contributing to 
changes in consumption and production patterns in the 
productive sectors (agriculture, mining, fishing, industries, 
energy, etc.) (IRRF.5.2.3) 
Baseline (2022): 9 
Target (2026): 21 
Source: UNDP, Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 
(MAG), MPCEIP,  Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM), 
annual 
 
Indicator 2.2.2. Number of innovative financing 
mechanisms and instruments created and/or strengthened to 
support green recovery (IRRF.5.2.3) 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2026): 4 
Source: UNDP, National Corporation of Popular and 
Solidarity Finance, MEF, annual 
 
Indicator 2.2.3. Number of persons who have implemented 
sustainable production systems to conserve the environment 
and reduce poverty 
Baseline (2022): Total 33,000, focused on: Women 9,900 
Target (2026): Total 37,500, focused on: Women 11,925 
Source: UNDP, MAG, annual 
 
Indicator 2.2.4. Area managed under a conservation and 
sustainable use regime (IRRF.4.1.2) 
Baseline (2022): 7,000,000 hectares 
Target (2026): 8,866,037 hectares 
Source: UNDP, water funds, MAATE, annual 
National priority or goal: NDP 2021-2025 O1, O2, O3, O4, O5. Sustainable Development Goals 2, 5, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15 
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #3. In 2026, the State and society have reduced socio-economic inequalities and have promoted a sustainable and value-added 
productive transformation, the generation of livelihoods and decent work, guaranteeing equal rights and opportunities and equal access to resources for women and men. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
Indicator 3.1. Adequate employment rate 
Baseline (2021): National 32.5% 
Target: National 50% (PND.1.1.1) 
INEC, annual 
Output 3.1. Institutions develop standards and instruments, 
and private sector initiatives are strengthened to increase 
productivity, productive transformation, innovation, 
digitization and competitiveness, with a territorial, inclusive 
and sustainable approach.    
MPCEIP  
MAG  
Ministry of Tourism  
MDT  
MAATE  
Secretariat of Higher Education, 
Regular   
$389.5 
 
 
 
Other  
$5,076  
 
 
 
 
UNIDO, annual 
 
 
22-27504 
12/14 
 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
Science, Technology and 
Innovation  
MREMH 
MINTEL  
SNP  
EPS Actors 
DAG 
European Union  
Economic Development Agencies  
Chambers and Guilds  
Clusters  
Academia 
UN-Women  
UNICEF 
UNV  
IOM  
ILO  
UNHCR 
CSO  
 
  
Indicator 3.1.1. Number of public and private policies 
supported to promote socio-economic inclusion, decent work, 
competitiveness, productivity, innovation, digitalization, 
gender mainstreaming, and environmental sustainability 
Baseline (2022): 2    
Target (2026): 6  
Source: UNDP, MPCEIP, DAG, annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2. Percentage of total 
value added of the industrial sector 
corresponding to small industries 
Baseline (2018):  0.33 
Target: 4.6  
Output  3.2.  Economic  units have  strengthened  capacities  to 
promote equitable access to productive resources and markets, 
and 
business 
digitization, in a context of adaptation, escalation, resilience, 
risk management, and environmental sustainability.  
formalization, 
productivity 
increased 
  
Indicator 3.2.1. Number of persons accessing financial 
services (IRRF.1.3.2)  
Baseline (2022): Total 120, Women 60, Men 60    
Target (2026): Total 1,000, Women 500, Men 500 (Youth 
100, Migrants 150, Ethnic minorities 50) 
Source: UNDP, MPCEIP, DAG, annual  
 
  
Indicator 3.2.2. Number of persons accessing non-financial 
assets (IRRF.1.3.3)  
Baseline (2022): Total 650; women 325, men 325 
Target (2026): Total 4,150; women 2,075, men 2,075, 
(youth 415, migrants 623, ethnic minorities 208) 
Source: UNDP, MPCEIP, DAG, annual  
 
National priority or goal: NDP 2021-2025 O9, O10, O14, O15, O16. Sustainable Development Goals 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 16 
Cooperation framework outcome involving UNDP #4: In 2026, the State improves public management and increases the protection and guarantee of rights, gender equality and social 
cohesion, while reducing threats to human security and promoting the eradication of all forms of violence. 
Related Strategic Plan outcome 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
Indicator 4.1. Index of perception of the 
quality of public services in general 
Baseline (2021): 6 
Target: 8 (NDP.14.3.2.) 
National Employment, 
Unemployment and Sub-
employment Survey, 
INEC, annual 
Output 4.1. Public institutions carry out more effective, 
efficient, transparent, representative, and participatory 
management at national and local levels, and society achieves 
greater influence in decision-making. 
Regular   
$389.5 
Institutions of the following 
branches of Government: 
Executive, Legislative, Judicial, 
Electoral, Transparency and 
Social Control  
Presidency of the Republic  
Ministry of Interior 
Ministry of Defence  
MEF  
MIES  
 
Other  
$8,459 
 
 
 
Indicator 4.2. Political Participation Index 
Baseline (2021): 6.11 
Target: 7.78 
The Economist, annual 
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of institutions strengthened to 
increase their effectiveness and transparency and their 
application of rights, inclusion, gender and participation 
approaches  
(IRRF: 2.1.1, 2.2.1, 2.4.1, 6.2.1) 
 
13/14 
22-27504 
DP/DCP/ECU/4 
 
 
MREMH  
INEC  
European Union 
Equality Councils  
DAG  
CSOs 
Volunteers  
Academia  
Private sector 
Baseline (2022): (a) national institutions: 17, (b) local 
governments: 17. 
Target (2026): (a) 22, (b) 22. 
Source: UNDP, annual 
 
Indicator 4.1.2. Number of civil society organizations, 
including volunteers, that have increased their incidence and 
application of rights, inclusion, gender, and participation 
approaches  
(IRRF: 2.1.3, 2.2.1) 
Baseline (2022): 10 
Target (2026): 18  
Source: UNDP, annual 
 
 
Output 4.2. With the support of society, national and local 
institutions reduce threats to human security while promoting 
social cohesion and conflict prevention, and eradicating all 
types of violence (especially gender-based violence). 
 
Indicator 4.2.1. Number of measures implemented by 
national and local institutions that promote human security, 
social cohesion, and eradication of violence 
(IRRF: 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.4.5) 
Baseline (2022): 6 
Target (2026): 12 
Source: UNDP, annual 
 
 
22-27504 
14/14 
