A/69/395  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  22 September
2014        Original: English        Sixty-ninth session  Agenda items 19 (a)
and (i)    Sustainable development: implementation of Agenda 21,   the Programme
for the Further Implementation of   Agenda 21 and the outcomes of the World
Summit on   Sustainable Development and of the United Nations  Conference on
Sustainable Development    Promotion of new and renewable sources of energy
United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All          Report of the
Secretary-General*            Summary  The United Nations Decade of Sustainable
Energy for All (2014 -2024) offers a  unique opportunity for all stakeholders to
come together around a common platform  to act to make sustainable energy for
all a reality and, through this, help to eradicate  poverty  and  lead  to
sustainable  development  and  global  prosperity.  On  the  basis  of  input
from Member States and other relevant stakeholders, the present report lays out
some broad pillars as a global plan of action for the Decade. The report also
suggests  how  the  full  spectrum  of  activities  can  be  brought  together
to  ensure  long -term  implementation  and  realization  of  the
predictability  and  synergies  sustainable energy for all within the context of
the  post-2015 development agenda.    towards          *  The present report was
submitted late owing to the inclusion of recent political and technical
developments.  14-61423 (E)    260914  *1461423*      A/69/395      I.
Introduction        1.  Recognizing  that  access  to  modern  affordable
energy  services  in  developing  countries  is  essential  for  sustainable
development,  the  General  Assembly,  in  its  resolution  65/151,  decided  to
declare  2012  the  International  Year  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All.
During  that  year,  many  initiatives  were  undertaken  by  Member  States and
international organizations, including the Secretary-General’s Sustainable
Energy  for  All  initiative,  to  create,  in  response  to  the  resolution,
an  enabling  environment  for the  promotion  of  access  to  energy and energy
services  and the  use  of new and renewable energy technologies at all levels.
2.  Stressing the need for a coherent, integrated approach to energy issues and
the  for  sustainable  promotion  of  synergies  across  development,  the
General  Assembly,  in  its  resolution  67/215,  decided  to  declare
2014-2024 the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All, to be
promoted  through  all  sources  of  energy,  mindful  of  the  provisions  of
the  annex  to  Economic  and Social Council resolution 1980/67.   the  global
energy  agenda      II.  Background        A.  Energy and sustainable
development        3.  Energy  is  inextricably  linked  to  most  global
challenges.  Access  to  energy  sources  has  been  a  major  driver  of
development  in  industrialized  countries  and  emerging  economies.  Energy
helps  to  eradicate  poverty,  increase  food  production,  provide  clean
water,  improve  public  health,  enhance  education,  address  climate  change,
create  economic  opportunity  and  empower  young  people  and  women.
Although there was no specific Millennium Development Goal relating to energy,
it  is  widely  recognized  as  a  prerequisite  to  the  achievement  of  the
Goals  and  sustainable  development,  as  emphasized  by  numerous
international  debates,  including  the  World  Summit  on  Sustainable
Development,  the  High -level  Plenary  Meeting  of  the  General  Assembly  on
the  Millennium  Development  Goals,  the  United Nations Conference on
Sustainable Development, and the thematic debate of  the  General  Assembly  on
“Water,  Sanitation  and  Sustainable  Energy  in  the  Post-2015 Development
Agenda”.  4.  Nevertheless,  1.3  billion  people,  or  nearly  one  in  five
globally,  continue  to  lack electricity. Twice as many still rely on wood,
charcoal, animal or crop waste or  other  solid  fuels to  cook their  food  and
heat their  homes. The  “energy -poor”  suffer  the  health  consequences  of
inefficient  combustion  of  solid  fuels  in  inadequately  ventilated
buildings,  which  kills  around  four  million  people  a  year,  most  of
them  women  and  children,1  as  well  as  the  economic  consequences  of
insufficient  power  for  productive  income-generating  activities  and  for
other  basic  services,  such  as  health  and  education.  In  particular,
women  and  girls  in  the  developing  world  are  disproportionately affected
in that regard.  __________________  1  Stephen S. Lim et al., “A comparative
risk assessment of burden of disease and injury    attributable to 67 risk
factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990 -2010: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010”, The Lancet, vol. 380,
issue 9859  (15 December 2012).  14-61423  2/14    A/69/395      5.  Where
modern  energy  services  are  plentiful,  there  are  different  challenges.
Emissions  of  carbon  dioxide  and  other  greenhouse  gases  from  fossil
fuels  are  contributing to changes in the Earth’s climate, to the detriment of
those who depend  on  the  planet’s  natural  systems  for  survival.  Climate
change  threatens  food  and  water  security  for  hundreds  of  millions  of
people,  undermining  the  most  essentia l  foundations of local, national and
global stability. Competition for scarce resources  is  increasing,
exacerbating  old  conflicts  and  creating  new  ones.  As  lands  degrade,
forests are felled and sea levels rise, the movement of people who have been
driven  from their homes by environmental change may reshape the human geography
of the  planet.  6.  The  transition  to  sustainable  energy  systems  provides
perhaps  one  of  the  largest  global  economic  opportunities  of  the
twenty-first  century,  which  is  particularly  important  at  a  time  when
countries  are  looking  to  improve  economic  performance  and  create
sustainable  jobs  and  employment  opportunities.  Despite  tremendous
progress,  barriers  still  exist  to  promoting  sustainable  energy
solutions,  especially  given  the  need  for  a  dramatic  change  in  the
pace  and  scale  of  how  this  issue  is  addressed  on  the  ground.  Action
is  needed  in  areas  such  as  finance,  technology  development,  policy  and
regulatory  innovation  and  improved  business  models and governance
structures.  7.  A  global  transformation  of  the  way  energy  is  produced
and  consumed  is  needed in order to provide sustainable energy for all,
satisfy rapid growth in energy  demand,  particularly  in  many  developing
countries  and  emerging  economies,  and  diminish  the  negative  impacts  of
climate  change.  Modern  energy  services  stand  at  the  centre  of  global
efforts  to  induce  a  paradigm  shift  towards  green  economies,  poverty
eradication and, ultimately, sustainable development.   8.  The  goals  that
need  to  be  achieved  to  promote  human  well-being  depend  on  progress in
the global transformation of energy systems. Societies all over the world  will
not be able to advance their sustainable development goals unless extraordinary
changes  are  implemented  in  the  way  energy  is  produced  and  used,  and
measur es  implemented  to  secure  access  to  affordable,  sustainable  modern
and  clean  energy  systems.  9.  Record  investment  is  needed  to  propel
innovation,  development  and  the  commercialization of  environmentally  sound
technologies.  Cooperation and actions  are  needed  to  substantially  increase
the  contribution  of  those  technologies  to  the  world’s energy systems and
to guarantee modern energy services to everyone.       B.  Inducing change
10.  The  global  conversation  about  energy  and  sustainable  development  is
already  fully under way. In many discussions, including in the General
Assembly, the United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development  and
the  new  annual  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Forum,  the  past  several
years  have  seen  an  increasing  recognition  and reaffirmation that energy is
central to virtually everything we do.  11.  Momentum  is  growing.  In  many
countries  and  regions,  including  the  States  members of the European Union,
small island developing States, States members of  the Asian  and Pacific
Energy  Forum,  and the  least developed countries,  sustainable  energy for all
has been endorsed as a political priority through explicit declarations
14-61423  3/14    A/69/395      and  commitments  to  action.  Government
commitment  is  increasingly  being  backed  by  leaders  from  all  sectors  of
society,  including  business  entities,  civil  society  and  international
organizations.  12.  Representatives of Member States interested in energy have
formed the Group  of  Friends  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All,  an  informal
and  cross -regional  group  of  approximately 30 Permanent Representatives to
the United Nations in New York, to  promote effective dialogue on energy issues.
13.  Responding  to  the  heightened  call  for  action  with  regard  to
energy,  the  Secretary-General  has  taken  a  number  of  steps,  most
notably  by  establishing  the  Sustainable  Energy  for All  initiative  in
2011. The  Secretary-General  also  convened  the  High-level  Panel  on  the
Post-2015  Development Agenda,  which  recognized  the  importance of energy in
the post-2015 development agenda.   14.  The  United  Nations  system also  took
the  lead in  organizing  multi-stakeholder  thematic  consultations  globally
in  support  of  the  discussions  on  the  post -2015  development  agenda.
The  consultation  on  energy  called  for  sustainable  energy  for  all  as  a
global  goal,  and  for  a  global  network  on  sustainable  energy  for  all
to  help  continue dialogue with an array of stakeholders on energy issues.
C.  Sustainable energy for all actions and activities leading up     to the
Decade      1.  International Year of Sustainable Energy for All      15.  In
2010,  the  General  Assembly,  recognizing  the  importance  of  access  to
modern  affordable  energy  services  in  developing  countries  for  the
achievement  of  the  the  Millennium  Development Goals, declared 2012 the
International Year of Sustainable Energy for  All.  In  its  resolution  65/151,
the  Assembly,  inter  alia,  requested  the  Secretary- General,  in
consultation  with  relevant  agencies  within  the  United  Nations  system
and  UN-Energy,  to  organize  and  coordinate  activities  to  be  undertaken
during  the  Year,  and  encouraged  all  Member  States,  the  United  Nations
system  and  all  other  actors  to  take  advantage  of  the  Year  to
increase  awareness  of  the  importance  of  addressing  energy  issues,
including  modern  energy  services  for  all,  access  to  affordable  energy,
energy  efficiency  and  the  sustainability  of  energy  sources  and  use, and
to promote action at the local, national, regional and international levels.
including  internationally  agreed  development  goals,  16.  Consequently,  a
number  of  global  and  regional  events  and  initiatives  were  launched  in
order to  spread information  about those  issues. 2 The  observance  of  the
Year  was  very  successful  in  the  sense  that  it  created  global
awareness  of  the  importance  of  energy  for  sustainable  development  and
ha s  brought  the  issue  to  the  top  of  the  agenda  of  decision  makers
at  the  national  and  international  levels.  Furthermore,  it  has  sparked
unprecedented  commitments  for  action  that  promise  to  advance  long-term
solutions  to  critical  problems  relating  to  energy.  The  Year  also
served as a platform for building partnerships among Governments, organizations
of  the  United  Nations  system,  the  private  sector,  civil  society  and
other  actors.  It  has  provided  an  effective  forum  for  the  sharing  of
experiences  and  good  pract ices  to  __________________  2  For additional
information on activities undertaken during the Year, see A/67/314.    14-61423
4/14    A/69/395      build more inclusive national energy sectors that will
improve access to sustainable  energy.    2.  Sustainable Energy for All
initiative of the Secretary-General      17.  In  response  to  the  2010
declaration  by  the  General Assembly  of  2012  as  the  International Year of
Sustainable Energy for All, the Secretary-General launched the  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  initiative  in  2011.  The  initiative  seeks  to  support
the  objective  of  sustainable  energy  for  all  by  identifying  and
mobilizing  action  by  all  stakeholders  in  support  of  a  major  global
transformation  of  energy  systems.  The  initiative seeks to ensure
sustainable energy for all by 2030 through the achievement  of  three  major
objectives:  (a)  ensuring  universal  access  to  modern  energy  services;
(b)  doubling  the  rate  of  improvement  in  energy  efficiency;  and  (c)
doubling  the  share of renewable energy in the global energy mix. 3   18.  To
guide  the  work  of  the  Sustainable  Energy  for All  initiative,  the
Secretary - General  appointed  a  high-level  group  of  distinguished  leaders
from  around  the  world.  The  High-level  Group  on  Sustainable  Energy  for
All  produced  a  Global  Action Agenda  (see A/67/175)  during  2012,  which
provides  a  concrete  strategy  for  engagement  by  all  actors  across
different  sectors  of  society.  It  also  aims  to  help  countries and
stakeholders create their own pathways  towards sustainable energy for  all,  on
the  basis  of  technology  choices  that  are  appropriate  to  their  unique
national  and local circumstances.  19.  In  September  2012,  the  Group
published  a  report  summarizing  its  work  (see  A/67/551)  and  the
Secretary-General  appointed  a  Special  Representative  for  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  and  Chief  Executive  of  the  Sustainable  Energ y  for  All
initiative. Furthermore, an Advisory Board for the initiative was formed and is
being  co-chaired  by  the  Secretary-General  and  the  President  of  the
World  Bank. A  three - tiered structure is now guiding, overseeing and
supporting the implementation o f the  initiative.  It  includes  the  Advisory
Board,  an  Executive  Committee  and  a  Global  Facilitation  Team.  Regional
and  thematic  hubs  are  also  being  created  to  further  support  the
necessary  work.  In  addition,  a  Global  Tracking  Framework, 4  a  joint
product of the World Bank, the International Energy Agency and more than 15
other  international organizations, was launched to establish baseline energy
data to ensure  accountability and transparency.   initiative  is  succeeding
in  catalysing  significant  commit ments  20.  The  to  sustainable  energy  by
Governments,  the  United  Nations  system,  multilateral  development  banks,
the  private  sector  and  civil  society.  More  than  80  developing  States
have  partnered  with  the  initiative,  while  developed  countries,  civil
society  and  businesses  are  continuing  to  pledge  contributions  in  the
tens  of  billions  of  dollars. In close collaboration with many partners from
all sectors of society, as well  as established thematic and regional hubs,
concrete actions are already carried out in  many  countries.  Many  of  the
actions  and  collaborations  are  structured  around  high  impact
opportunities, country action plans and investment prospectuses.   21.  Many
countries  and regions  have also  endorsed  sustainable energy  for  all  and
the  initiative  as  a  political  priority,  through  explicit  declarations
and  commitments  __________________  3  United Nations, Sustainable Energy for
All: A Vision Statement by Ban Ki-moon, Secretary-   General of the United
Nations (New York, November 2011).  4  Available from www.se4all.org/tracking-
progress.    14-61423  5/14    A/69/395      to action. Some examples include
the Oslo Energy for All Conference on financing  access for the poor (2011); the
Conference of Energy Ministers of Africa (2012); the  European  Union
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Summit  (2012);  the  Ministerial  Conference  on
Achieving  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  in  Small  Island  Developing  States
(2012); the Third Clean Energy Ministerial Conference (2012); the High -level
Meeting  on  Sustainable  Energy  for  the  Least  Developed   Countries
(2013);  the  Elysée  Summit  for  Peace  and  Security  in  Africa  (2013);
the  Pacific  Energy  and  Transport  Ministers  Meeting  (2014);  and  the
Ministerial  Conference  on  New  Partnerships  for  Productive  Capacity-
Building  in  the  Least  Developed  Countries  (2014).    3.  United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development      22.  In  the  outcome  document  of
the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development, entitled “The
future  we  want”, endorsed by the General Assembly in  its resolution 66/288,
Heads of State and Government and high-level representatives  stated that “we
are all determined to act to make sustainable energy for all a reality  and,
through this, help to eradicate poverty and lead to sustainable dev elopment and
global prosperity”. They went on to recognize “the critical role that energy
plays in  the  development  process,  as  access  to  sustainable  modern
energy  services  contributes  to  poverty  eradication,  saves  lives,
improves  health  and  helps  provide  for basic human needs”.  23.  The  Heads
of  State  and  Government  and  high-level  representatives  also  emphasized
the  need  to  address  the  challenge  of  access  to  sustainable  modern
energy  services  for  all,  in  particular  for  the  poor,  who  are  unable
to  afford  such   services  even  when  they  are  available.  They  emphasized
the  need  to  take  further  action  to  improve  that  situation,  including
by  mobilizing  adequate  financial  resources,  so  as  to  provide  those
services  in  developing  countries  in  a  reliable,  affordable,  economically
viable  and  socially  and  environmentally  acceptable  manner.  24.  They
further recognized that improving energy efficiency, increasing the share  of
renewable  energy  and  cleaner  and  energy-efficient  technologies  were
important  for sustainable development, including in addressing climate change.
Commitments  announced at the Conference (see A/67/551) included the following:
(a)  More than 70 developing countries opted to work with the initiative, with
many more following;  (b)  More  than  $50  billion  was  pledged  in  support
of  the  objectives  of  the    initiative from the private sector and
investors;  (c)  Tens  of  billions  of  dollars  were  committed  by
multilateral  development    banks in Asia, Europe and Latin America;  (d)
Hundreds of actions were catalysed and commitments made in support of    the
three core objectives;  (e)  Commitments  to  support  energy  access  will
provide  more  than  1  billion    people with access to modern energy during
the lifespan of the initiative;   (f)  New  public-private  partnerships  are
being  formed  with  regard  to    transport, energy efficiency, solar cooking,
finance and energy access for the poor.   14-61423  6/14    A/69/395      4.
Energy and the post-2015 development agenda      25.  The High-level Panel on
the Post-2015 Development Agenda convened by the  Secretary-General strongly
recommended the integration of energy in the post -2015  development  agenda.
The  final  report  from  the  Panel  included  an  illustrative,  dedicated,
global sustainable development goal relating to energy.   26.  The  Open
Working  Group  on  Sustainable  Development  Goals  of  the  General  Assembly
included  in  its  report  a  proposal  of  a  goal  on  ensuring  access  to
affordable,  reliable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy  for  all,  accompanied
by  targets  on energy access, renewable energy and energy efficiency, as well
as two targets on  related means of implementation. The proposed goals will
undergo consideration by  the  General Assembly  as part of  deliberation  on
the overall post -2015 development  agenda.  27.  The World  Bank  has
estimated  that  to  achieve  the  three  targets  of  sustainable  energy  for
all  (and  the  proposed  sustainable  development  goal  on  energy),  total
global  investments  required  will  be  about  $600  billion  to  $800  billion
per  year,  which includes $50 billion per year for energy access alone, and the
rest for energy  efficiency  and  renewable  energy  targets.  To  meet  this
challenge,  the  Secretary - General and the President of the World Bank Group
have set up a finance committee  of  multilateral  development  banks,  private
commercial  ba nks  and  institutional  investors  to  consider  innovative
ways  of  mobilizing  resources  to  support  country - level  actions  .The
three  work  streams  on  which  the  committee  is  working  are:
identification  of  business  opportunities  by  countries/regions  and  their
abso rptive  capacity;  sources  of  capital,  requirements  for  de-risking
and  market  transformation  and new innovations to leverage multilateral
development banks capital; and project  development  capacity,  funding  and
institutional  arrangements.  For  new  financing  structures,  the  Committee
is  evaluating  four  thematic  areas  within  which  several  variants  of
financing  structures  are  being  discussed:  (a)  scaling  up  green  bonds;
(b) direct foreign investment and private-sector risk-sharing structures; (c)
enabling  new  solutions  with  insurance;  and  (d)  aggregation  themes  to
attract  additional  funding  into  small-scale  energy  access,  renewables
and  energy  efficiency  investments.  A  draft  report  was  presented  at  the
first  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Forum in June 2014, and further
consultations are taking place with select financing  institutions,  banks and
investors. A report on  how  to  mobilize the  first $120 billion  will be ready
by the end of the year.  It is  worth reporting that, according to the Renewable
Energy Policy Ne twork  28.  for  the  21st  Century  report  of  June  2014,
140  countries  have  already  set  voluntary  targets for renewable energy in
their energy mix. The challenge is to how to support  capacity-building  in
these  countries  for  energy  sector  reforms  and  technology  transfer  to
help  them  achieve  their  renewable  energy  targets.  Furthermore,  the
European  Union  has  pledged,  under  Sustainable  Energy  for  All,  to
support  the  provision of modern energy services to 500 million poor people by
2030, with initial  funding  of  €3  billion  to  leverage  €13  billion  over
the  next  six  years.  This  is  complemented  by  the  announcement  in
August  2014  by  the  Government  of  the  United  States  of America  under
the  Power Africa  initiative  to  connect  300  million  people  in  Africa  to
electricity  in  five  years,  with  public -private  financing  of  $20
billion;  a  memorandum  of  understanding  will  be  signed  with  Sustainable
Energy  for All later in the  year. In  addition, in 2014,  the  new  Government
of India  announced its commitment to achieve universal access to energy for the
poor within  14-61423  7/14    A/69/395      five  years.  With  this  measure
alone,  it  is  conceivable  that  energy  poverty  could  be  reduced  by  over
50  per  cent  by  2030.  Therefore,  it  is  strongly  recommended  that
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  should  be  the  initiative  through  which  to
track  and  monitor whether such commitments are achieved within  the post-2015
development  agenda,  and  to  determine  which  are  the  best  practices
learned  in  the  process  and  what further partnerships can be established to
accelerate the pace for ensuring that  the  proposed  sustainable  development
goal  on  energy  is  fully  ac hieved  within  the  next two decades.      D.
Mandates of the Decade        In  its  resolution  67/215,  the  General
Assembly  decided  to  declare  2014-2024  29.  the  United  Nations  Decade  of
Sustainable  Energy  for  All.  Building  on  this,  the  Assembly,  through
its  resolution  68/210,  requested  the  Secretary-General,  in  consultation
with  Member  States,  to  lead  the  coordination  of  the  activities  of  the
Decade  on  behalf  of  the  United  Nations  system,  from  extrabudgetary
resources.  It  also  invited  Member  States  and  others  in  a  position  to
do  so  to  contribute,  on  a  voluntary basis, to the funding of the
activities of the Decade. This was affirmed in  resolution 68/224, in which the
Assembly stressed that the least developed countries  should receive a special
focus throughout the Decade.   30.  In response to the invitation by the General
Assembly in its resolution  67/215,  the  Secretary-General  submitted  a
report  on  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for  All
(A/68/309)  to  the  Assembly  at  its  sixty-eighth  session.  The  report
included  a  comprehensive  summary  of  many  of  the  very  encouraging
contributions  of  Member  States  and  other  stakeholders  to  the
achievement  of  sustainable  energy  for  all,  as  well  as  Member  States’
input  on  their  priorities  and  suggestions for the Decade.       E.
Overview of actions and activities so far in support of the Decade        1.
Appointment of a Special Representative for Sustainable Energy for All      31.
In  2013,  following  the  declaration  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the
United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for All,  the  Secretary-
General  appointed  his  Special  Representative  for  Sustainable  Energy  for
All.  The  Special  Representative,  who is also the Chair of UN-Energy and
Chief Executive Officer for the Sustainable  Energy  for All  initiative,
essentially  serves  as the  focal  point in the  United  Nations  system on
issues related to energy.  32.  In  his  above-mentioned  report,  the
Secretary-General  requested  his  Special  Representative for Sustainable
Energy for All to lead the overall coordination of the  activities for the
Decade, in consultation with Member States. That coordination will  be
supported  by  the  United  Nations  system  through  UN-Energy,  as  well  as
the  Sustainable Energy for All initiative, its Global Facilitation Team,
partners and other  relevant stakeholders.   33.  To undertake these
responsibilities, an Office of the Special Representative of  the Secretary-
General for Sustainable Energy for All was established in Vienna, with  a
liaison  office  in  New  York.  Staff  salaries,  other  operating  costs  for
the  Office,  meetings  of  the  Advisory  Board  and  various  events  have
been  supported  through  14-61423  8/14    A/69/395      voluntary
contributions  from  Austria,  Denmark,  Germany,  Iceland,  Norway,  Sweden,
the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland  and  the
European Commission.     2.  Global Decade launch and first annual Sustainable
Energy for All Forum      34.  The  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  was  formally  launched  by  the  President  of  the  General
Assembly  on  5  June  2014,  as  part  of  the  first  annual  Sustainable
Energy  for All  Forum. The  Forum  and  Decade  launch  also  included  the
launch  of  an  initial  two-year  special  focus  on  energy  for  women,
children and health. In launching the Decade, the President noted that the
Assembly  was acutely aware of the role that sustainable energy can and must
play in our future  planning.   35.  The  annual  Sustainable  Energy  for  All
Forum  will  include  related  cross - regional  activities  leading  up  to
and  feeding  into  it.  For  the  first  Forum,  held  from    4  to  6  June
2014,  more  than  1,000  leaders  from  Governments,  the  private  sector,
international  organizations  gathered  at  United  Nations  civil  society  and
Headquarters  in  New  York.  The  three  days  and  nearly  60  sessions
featured  more  than  300  speakers  from  all  regions  and  sectors  of
society,  including  more  than  20 participants at the ministerial level or
above.  36.  The key objectives of the first annual Sustainable Energy for All
Forum were:  (a)  to  launch  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable
Energy  for  All;  (b)  to  nurture the broader movement of civil society
organizations and stakeholders as part  of  the  Decade;  (c)  to  assess  the
progress  made  on  the  issue  of  Sustainable  Energy  for All two years after
the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development;  (d)  to  inspire  and
mobilize  further  action,  partnership s  and  commitments  by  showcasing
success  stories,  innovation  and  best  practices;  and  (e)  to  shape  and
set  the  direction  for  the  global  policy  discourse  on  energy  for  the
crucial  next  decades  to come.  37.  The  first  annual  Sustainable  Energy
for  All  Forum  incorporated  the  third  meeting  of  the  Sustainable  Energy
for  All  initiative’s  Advisory  Board.  During  the  Forum,  the  four
Advisory  Board  committees,  on  energy  access,  renewable  energy,  energy
efficiency and finance, reported on their preliminary results. The F orum also
included  sessions  entitled  “Growing  the  movement”,  “Catalysing  investment
through  innovative  business  models”,  “Sharing  knowledge  and  experiences,
developing  capacity”;  “Accelerating  country  action”;  “Ten  years  to
transform  the  world’s energy”; “Global leadership dialogue”; and “The human
face of sustainable  energy for all”.   38.  On  the  last  day  of  the  Forum,
more  than  60  delegates,  including  20  at  the  ministerial  level  or
above,  participated  in  a  high-level  dialogue  on  energy  in  the
post-2015  development  agenda.  The  debate  showed  strong  support  for
including  energy  as  part  of  the  new  development  framework,  including
in  its  sustainable  development  goals.  As  expressed  during  statements, 5
participants  welcomed  the  Decade  and  saw  the  new  Sustainable  Energy
for  All  Forum  as  a  useful  meeting  place  and  building  block  that
should  continue  to  contribute  to  sustainable  development through poverty
eradication and the curbing of climate change.    __________________  5
Available from www.se4all.org/se4all-forum/statements.    14-61423  9/14
A/69/395      3.  Other activities in support of the Decade      39.  A range of
activities as part of the Decade have already been held by different
stakeholder  communities  and  in  different  regions  around  the  world,
including  in  New Delhi (Delhi Sustainable Development Summit); Nadi, Fiji
(Pacific Energy and  Transport  Ministers  Meeting),  New  York  (Bloomberg
Future  of  Energy  Summit);  Kigali,  Rwanda  (Annual  Meeting  of  the African
Development  Bank),  Manila  (Asia  Clean  Energy  Forum);  Glasgow,  United
Kingdom  (20th  Commonwealth  Games);  and  Cotonou,  Benin  (Ministerial
Conference  on  New  Partnerships  for  Productive  Capacity-Building  in  the
Least  Developed  Countries),  as  well  as  cross -regional  student launches
(Regional Student Energy Summits). Further events are planned to  be held in
Apia (Third International Conference on Small Island Developing S tates),
Santiago  (launch  of  the  Decade  in  the  Americas)  and  Stockholm  (World
Water  Week).  40.  Many  United  Nations  agencies,  funds  and  programmes
that  are  members  of  UN-Energy  are also  already involved in  efforts that
support the  Decade, 6 including  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme;
the  World  Health  Organization;  the  United Nations Environment Programme;
the Food and Agriculture Organization of  the  United  Nations;  the  United
Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization;  the  United
Nations  Human  Settlements  Programme;  the  World  Meteorological
Organization;  the  United  Nations  Capital  Development  Fund;  the
International  Fund  regional  economic  commissions,  including  the  Economic
Commission  for  Europe,  the  Econ omic  Commission  for  Latin  America  and
the  Caribbean,  the  Economic  Commission  For  Africa  and  the  Economic
Commission  for Asia  and  the  Pacific;  the  United  Nations  Conference  on
Trade  and  Development;  the  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs;
the  United  Nations  Foundation;  the  Renewable  Energy  Policy  Network  for
the  21st  Century;  the  International  Renewable  Energy Agency;  the  United
Nations  Children’s Fund; and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization.   for  Agricultural  Development;  the  41.  Such efforts so far
include:   • The  development  of  technical  advice  to  develop  specific
sustainable  energy  solutions,  in  particular  ones  relate  to  bottom-
up/decentralized  energy  options,  ensuring  that  the  Decade’s  activities
are  linked  to  the  national  development  priorities  of  developing
countries,  future  sustainable  development  goals,  follow-up  actions  of
the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development  and  the
ongoing  climate  change  discussions  under  the  United  Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change     • The strengthening of energy efficiency     •
The  development  of  solutions  to  the  enormous  disease  and  death  burden
associated  with  the  lack  of  access  to  clean,  modern  energy  solutions
and  inefficient energy use     • Continuing work on energy-smart food solutions
__________________  6  See www.un-energy.org for more information, including the
recent report entitled “Activities of    the member organizations and partners
of UN-Energy in support of the 2014-2024 United  Nations Decade of Sustainable
Energy for All”.  14-61423  10/14    A/69/395      • The  implementation of
land-,  marine-  and  space-based  observing  programmes  that will provide
information to decision makers on energy potential at various  sites     •
Support  for  low-income  and/or  rural  households  and  micro-entrepreneurs
to    gain access to modern energy through microfinance   • Energy commodity
development and greening international trade      • The  promotion  of  regional
cooperation  to  enhance  energy  security  and  the    sustainable use of
energy in various regions   • The  development  of  delivery  systems  for
technical  assistance,  capacity- building  and  policy  advice  in  support  of
access  by  developing  countries  to  clean and efficient energy for productive
use        III.  Global plan of action for the Decade        A.  Establishing
strategic objectives        42.  In  their  inputs  to  the  previous  report
of  the  Secretary-General  on  the  United  Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  ( A/68/309),  Member  States  offered  guidance  as  to  the
direction  of  the  Decade.  Among  the  opinions  expresse d  was  support  for
a  strong  implementation  programme during the  Decade.  Member  States  also
expressed that the Global Action Agenda could serve as a useful framework for
the activities of the  Decade. Originally established in response to and  in
support of  the International Year of Sustainable Energy for All, the
Sustainable Energy for All  initiative will also support the United Nations
Decade of Sustainable Energy for All,  with  the  strategic  objectives  of  the
Global  Action  Agenda.  With  its  concrete  objectives,  comprehensive
toolbox  of  resources  and  thousands  of  implementing  partners  from  all
regions  and  sectors  of  societies,  the  initiative  could  contribute
substantially  to  the  implementation  of  the  Decade.  That  implementation
program  should, inter alia:   (a)  Catalyse  actions  at  all  levels  to
transform  the  world’s  energy  systems  towards an equitable and sustainable
future: all stakeholders should lead the way by  example, by setting their own
goals and targets on energy and the nexus  with other  development  factors;
establishing  proactive  policies,  regulatory  frameworks  and  incentives  to
spur  innovation  and  investment;  facilitating  the  building  of  market
structures  time;  dramatically increasing  bottom-up  solutions;  expanding
capacity-building;  promoting  partnerships; enhancing research and development;
and disseminating information on  experiences and lessons learned;    to
deliver  sustainable  energy  solutions  and  services  over  (b)  Create  an
enabling  environment  for  a  significant  increase  in  investment  in the
world’s energy systems: the International Energy Agency estimates that nearly
$1 trillion in cumulative investment is needed to achieve universal energy
access by  2030.7 In  addition,  massive  investments in  renewable  energy  and
energy  efficiency  are necessary in order to reach the global energy goals of
the Sustainable Energy for  All initiative;    __________________  7
International Energy Agency, World Energy Outlook 2012: Executive Summary
(Paris, 2012).    14-61423  11/14    A/69/395      (c)  Catalyse overall
investment in the world’s energy systems: public -private  partnerships  will
be  essential  to  mobilizing  the  massive  investment  needed  for  the
global  transformation  of  energy  systems.  It  will  be  essential  to  use
public  investment  in  order  to  leverage  the  private  investment  that  is
required  to  achieve  this transformation;    (d)  Increase  support  for
research  and  development:  Governments  and  the  private sector will need to
support such efforts to drive technological innovation and  reduce  the  cost
of  clean  energy  technologies,  to  make  them  increasingly  attractive
economically all over the world;     (e)  Continue  to  expand  global
consultations  with  all  stakeholders  both  in  developing  and  developed
countries:  civil  society,  businesses,  young  people  and  Governments
should continue  a dialogue  in order to ensure that the perspectives of  all
stakeholders are appropriately captured and fed into the Decade programme, the
post-2015 development agenda and other relevant processes;    (f)  Create more
incentives for a change in behaviour to manage and allocate  resources  in  a
more  sustainable  manner:  activities  relating  to  the  Decade  should
promote  sustainable  energy  production  and  consumption  so  that  energy
resources  are used in a more equitable manner;    (g)  Expand  data  and
statistical  programmes  in  developing  countries:  more  work  is  needed  on
energy-integrated  targets,  indicators  and  definitions  and  on  identifying
data  needs  to  capture  the  many  dimensions  and  interlinkages  and  to
ensure national relevance and  measurability. The Sustainable Energy for All
Global  Tracking Framework can provide support in that respect;     (h)  Expand
and  increase  partnerships  and  commitments:  actions  and   programmes
relating  to  the  Decade  should  seek  to  expand  current  partnerships  and
coalitions  and  secure  new  partnerships and  commitments  for  interim  goals
by 2024  and beyond;    (i)  Enhance  dissemination  of  knowledge,  commitments
and  solutions:  the  Decade should provide a platform for Governments and non-
governmental actors to  disseminate knowledge and showcase and announce
contributions and solutions that  accelerate the ultimate goal of sustainable
energy for all.        B.  Suggested broad outline of activities and focus areas
43.  In  their  input,  Member  States  considered  the  Decade  as  a  major
platform  that  will  help  to  accelerate  the  necessary  transformation  of
global  energy  systems.  As  such,  the  Decade  will  continue  to  build  on
the  already  existing  momentum.  Stakeholders  from  the  private  and
financial  sectors,  civil  society  and  international  organizations are
already rallying behind the determination of Governments to act to  make
sustainable energy for all a reality and, through this, help to eradicate
poverty  and  lead  to  sustainable development  and  global  prosperity. In  an
attempt to  engage  potential  partners  even  further,  the  United  Nations
Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  will  continue  to  be  promoted  at  different
important  events,  conferences  and  arenas  around the world.   44.  Member
States  expressed  that  they  should  use  the  Decade  as  a  platform  to
highlight  and  disseminate  success  stories,  lessons  learned,  best
practices  and  14-61423  12/14    A/69/395      solutions.  In  inspiring  and
pushing  efforts  towards  the  achievement  of  the  current  Millennium
Development Goals, as well as their successors, the coordination of the
activities  of  the  Decade  will  ensure  that  such  opportunities  will  be
provided.  Initially,  these  activities  will  mainly  take  the  form  of
continued  launches  of  the  Decade  for  different  regions  and  communities.
The  outreach  will  seek  to  create  awareness around the importance of
sustainable energy for all, including the role of  sustainable energy as an
enabler for other sustainable development gains.   45.  At  the  outset  of  the
Decade,  Member  States  have  also  suggested  setting  specific thematic
focuses for parts of the Decade, in order to ensure attention around  critical
issue  areas.  Following  concrete  proposals  for  such  a  thematic  focus,
the  global  launch  of  the  Decade  already  saw  the  launch  of  a  two-year
initial  campaign  on  issues  relating  to  energy,  women,  children  and
health.  Every  year,  around  4 million  people,  mainly  women  and  children,
die  prematurely  from  illnesses  attributable to the household air pollution
from cooking with solid f uels. More than  50  per  cent  of  premature  deaths
among  children  under  the  age  of  5  are  due  to  pneumonia caused by
particulate matter (soot) inhaled from household air pollution.       C.
Milestones and tracking of progress        46.  An  important  contribution  to
the  Decade  and  the  post-2015  development  agenda  is  the  Sustainable
Energy  for  All  Global  Tracking  Framework,  which  is  provided  under  the
leadership  of  the  World  Bank  and  the  International  Energy  Agency,  is
a  comprehensive mechanism to track progress in the area of sustainable energy
for all,  as  measured  by  progress  within  the  three  streams  of  energy
access,  energy  efficiency and renewable energy. The original 2013 version will
be updated in early  2015,  and  new  updates  will  continue  to  be  made
available  on  a  regular  basis  throughout the Decade and beyond. The Global
Tracking Framework will be used to  measure progress during the Decade.  in
collaboration  with  more  than  15  other  organizations.   It  47.  In  their
inputs,  Member  States  expressed  that  the  Decade  should  support  the
post-2015 development agenda and, in particular, any sustainable development
goals  and  targets.  The  Decade  was  seen  as  an  opportunity  to  set  up
a  number  of  interim  goals  and  milestones  to  be  reached  by  2024,  in
support  of  the  final  goals  of  the   Sustainable Energy for All initiative
by 2030. As soon as the post -2015 development  agenda  is  adopted,  this  will
form  the  new  global  development  paradigm,  which  is  also  expected  to
stretch  throughout  and  beyond  the  duration  of  the  Decade.  The  Decade
will  contribute  to  building  momentum  around  any  agreed  and  relevant
sustainable  development  goal  under  the  post-2015  development  agenda.  The
establishment  of  informal  interim  milestones  could  also  be  considered
among  coalitions of partners.       IV.  Organizational arrangements        48.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sustainable Energy for
All,  in  leading  the  coordination  of  activities  under  the  Decade  on
behalf  of  the  Secretary-General,  will  also  draw  on  its  roles  as  Chair
of  UN-Energy  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Sustainable  Energy  for
All  initiative.  The  Chair  of  UN-Energy  stays  in  regular  and  close
touch  with  relevant  parts  of  the  United  14-61423  13/14    A/69/395
Nations  system.  The  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Sustainable  Energy
for  All  initiative  has  at  its  disposal  a  Global  Facilitation  Team,
which  facilitates  contact  with  thousands  as  partners  of  the  initiative
from  all  regions  and  sectors  of  society.  The  initiative  is  guided  by
a  multi-stakeholder  Advisory  Board,  co-chaired  by  the  Secretary-General
and  the  President  of  the  World  Bank,  as  well  as  an  Executive
Committee.  49.  The  Special  Representative  will  work  towards  putting  in
place  long -term  institutional  structures  for  the  Sustainable  Energy  for
All  initiative,  including  the  establishment  of  an  international  not-for-
profit  organization,  in  the  course  of  2015.  Appropriate arrangements will
also be  made to ensure continued support  within the  United Nations to issues
related to sustainable energy.   50.  In  leading  the  coordination  of  the
activities  of  the  De cade  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary-General,  the
Special  Representative  has  been  requested  to  facilitate  the  reporting on
the activities of the Decade, as well as related activities. Member States  are
encouraged  to  provide  input  to  the  coordination  of  the  acti vities  of
the  Decade  on an ongoing basis.      V.  Conclusions and recommendations
51.  The  people  who  lack  energy  access  are  mainly  the  same  people  who
lack  access  to  clean  water  and  sanitation,  experience  high  food
insecurity  and  would  experience the worst impacts of climate change.  52.
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  has  proven  to  be  an  effective  framework
for  building  consensus  around  a  sustainable  development  goal  on  energy
and  accompanying targets and for establishing public-private partnerships.
53.  To  achieve  Sustainable  Energy  for  All  and  sustainable  development
goal  targets  will  require  scaled-up  actions  through  well-structured
public-private  partnerships to mobilize finance and incentivize technology
deployment.   54.  Considering  the  scale  of  investments  required  and  the
complexity  of  energy  sector  reforms,  significant  capacity-building
support  for  developing  countries,  especially the least  developed  countries
and  small  island developing  States,  will  be  required.  55.  The
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  Global  Tracking  Framework,  supported  by  UN-
Energy  and  more  than  20  agencies,  could  serve  as  a  basis  for
developing  a  robust  tracking,  monitoring  and  reporting  system  on  the
implementation  of  a  sustainable development goal on energy in the post-2015
development agenda.  56.  As  noted  in  paragraph  49  above,  long-term
institutional  structures  for  the  Sustainable Energy for All initiative,
involving the establishment of an international  not-for-profit  organization,
will  be  put  in  place  during  2015.  Going  forward,  appropriate
arrangements  would  also  need  to  be  made  to  ensure  continued  support
within the United Nations to issues related to sustainable energy, including
possible  mechanisms  for  tracking  and  reporting  on  the  proposed
sustainable  development  goal on energy.    14-61423  14/14