AlternAtive renewAble 
energy Policy 
2013
royAl government of bhutAn
  1
AlternAtive renewAble energy Policy  2013
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE 
ENERGY POLICY 
2013
ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF BHUTAN
  1
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
  3
  i
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
  5
  ii
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
ABBREVIATIONS
AD
Accelerated Depreciation
BEA
Bhutan Electricity Authority
BOO
Build-Own-Operate
BOOT
Build-Own-Operate-Transfer
BPC
Bhutan Power Corporation
CA
Concession Agreement
CDM
Clean Development Mechanism
CER
Certified Emission Reduction
COD
Commercial Operation Date
CSI
Cottage and Small Industries
DDG
Decentralised Distributed Generation
DGPC
Druk Green Power Corporation
DRE
Department of Renewable Energy
DPP
Detailed Project Proposal
DPR
Detailed Project Report
EDP
Economic Development Policy
EIA
Environmental Impact Assessment
EMP
Environment Management Plan
EoI
Expression of Interest
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
GBI
Generation Based Incentive
GHG
Green House Gas
  7
 iii
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
GHG
Green House Gas
GNHC
Gross National Happiness Commission
ICS
Improved Cook Stoves
kW
Kilo Watt
LoI
Letter of Intent
MoAF
Ministry of Agriculture & Forest
MoEA
Ministry of Economic Affairs
MoF
Ministry of Finance
MoIC
Ministry of Information and Communication
MoU
Memorandum of Understanding
MW
Mega Watt
NEC
National Environment Commission
PDA
Project Development Agreement
PPA
Power Purchase Agreement
RE
Renewable Energy
REDF
Renewable Energy Development Fund
REO
Renewable Energy Obligation
RfP
Request for Proposal
RGoB
Royal Government of Bhutan
RoC
Registrar of Companies
RPO
Renewable Purchase Obligation
SHP
Small Hydropower Projects
SPV
Special Purpose Vehicle
WTE
Waste to Energy
  8
  iv
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
Table of Contents:
1. Introduction 1: Page: 2
3. Target ..6: Page: 4
6. Implementation mechanism: Page: 11
7. Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG) Projects ..: Page: 16
8. Stand-alone RE Projects ..: Page: 17
9. Fossil Fuel Substitution by Green Energy Sources .: Page: 18
10. Project Clearance .: Page: 19
11. Investment Model ..: Page: 19
Table of Contents:
12. Project Ownership ..: Page: 20
13. Lock-in-period ..: Page: 21
14. Water use charges ..: Page: 21
15. Recycling and Management of waste: Page: 21
16. Foriegn Direct Investment (FDI): Page: 22
17. Land Acquisition and Compensation .: Page: 22
18. Financial Resource Management ..: Page: 22
19. Renewable Energy Development Fund (REDF ..: Page: 23
20. Utilization of REDF .: Page: 23
21. Promotional Measures .: Page: 24
22. Carbon Market Mechanism ..: Page: 26
23. Delivery Mechanism ..: Page: 27
24. Monitoring and Evaluation ..: Page: 30
25. Amendments ..: Page: 30
26. Deviation from the Policy Provisions .: Page: 30
27. Interpretation of the Policy ..: Page: 31
28. Definition .: Page: 31
1.  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1   The  unique  concept  of  Gross  National  Happiness  (GNH)  is  being 
pursued  by  the  Royal  Government  of  Bhutan  as  its  development 
philosophy,  reflecting  its  sensitivity  towards  preservation  of  its  rich 
cultural heritage and pristine environment while ensuring economic 
growth and overall well-being of its people. GNH is conceptually based 
on  promotion  of  sustainable  development,  preservation  of  cultural 
values, conservation of the natural environment, and establishment 
of good governance as its main pillars.
1.2 
Article 5 of the Constitution entrusts every Bhutanese as a trustee of 
the Kingdom’s natural resources and environment for the benefit of 
the present and future generations. It is the fundamental duty of every 
citizen  to  contribute  to  the  protection  of  the  natural  environment, 
conservation of the rich biodiversity of Bhutan and prevention of all 
forms of ecological degradation.
1.3 
The Royal Government of Bhutan has committed to keep absorbing 
more carbon than it emits - and to maintain its status as a net sink for 
Green House Gases (GHG) through the Declaration of the Kingdom of 
Bhutan dated 11 December 2009.
1.4 
Bhutan  is  endowed  with  significant  natural  resources,  including 
hydropower, solar, and wind potential, vast forest cover, and mineral 
resources. These resources are not only part of Bhutan’s rich ecology, 
but  a  balanced  approach  between  conservation  and  sustainable 
resource  development  has  helped  contribute  to  the  country’s 
progress. In 2011, hydropower sales accounted for the largest share 
of GDP, and met almost all of the country’s electricity needs. 
  1
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
1.5 
The  development  of  untapped  hydropower  potential  is  an  integral 
part  of  Bhutan’s  strategy  as  outlined  in  the  10th  Five  Year  Plan. 
Hydropower provides the country with a strong advantage, including 
economic benefits through export revenues, environmental benefits 
given  the  clean  nature  of  electricity  production,  and  an  electricity 
security advantage given important domestic resource availability. 
1.6 
At  the  same  time,  when  considering  Bhutan’s  energy  system  as  a 
whole, rising energy demand in the transport and industry sectors, 
rapidly growing imports of fossil fuels, the risk of reliance on a single 
electricity  source,  and  the  threats  of  climate  change  give  cause  to 
consider the advantages of a more diversified and independent energy 
system  that  meets  national  energy  needs  while  balancing  energy 
security,  environmental  preservation,  and  economic  development 
potential. 
1.7 
In particular, the Bhutan Transport Vision 2040 projects a drop in rural 
population  from  400,000  today  to  250,000  by  2040  as  individuals 
migrate from rural to urban centres in pursuit of better livelihoods. 
The  redistribution  of  the  population  is  expected  to  increase  travel 
demands  within  and  between  urban  areas,  resulting  in  enhanced 
congestion  and  environmental  degradation.  The  adoption  of  green 
transport technology solutions can help minimize carbon emissions 
and growing fuel consumption. 
1.8 
The  Country  has  also  witnessed  a  significant  increase  in  vehicular 
traffic  due  to  economic  development.  Consequently,  imports  of 
petroleum products have also increased from Nu 1.6 billion in 2004 
to  Nu  5.5  billion  in  2011  and  are  projected  to  rise  further.  This  has 
diverted  Government  resources  from  pursuing  developmental 
programmes,  and  enhances  vulnerability  to  rising  fuels  costs,  and 
availability of supply.
  2
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
1.9  With  some  of  these  trends  and  challenges  in  mind,  the  Bhutan 
Sustainable Hydropower Development Policy 2008 and the Economic 
Development Policy (EDP) 2010 recognise the need for a Renewable 
Energy  (RE)  Policy  to  promote  the  use  of  available  RE  sources 
to  strengthen  national  energy  security.  Promotion  of  RE  in  the 
country presents a unique challenge as Bhutan enjoys availability of 
adequate low-cost hydropower that is green and clean. The cost of 
RE generation is not competitive with hydropower generation if only 
cost of generation is considered. However, if the benefits of a more 
diversified energy system are considered, the rationale for supporting 
RE generation is clear. To realise diversified RE potential, it is however 
necessary to develop targeted policies, supported by shifting existing 
subsidies away from other sources of energy such as fossil fuels and 
current grid electricity, toward other RE technologies.
1.10 
In pursuit of this objective, this Alternative Renewable Energy Policy, 
built  by  taking  cues  from  the  Integrated  Energy  Management 
Master Plan 2010 and efforts of the Rural Electrification Master Plan 
2005, intends to provide the necessary direction for the promotion 
and  development  of  RE  that  not  only  contribute  to  meeting  the 
current energy requirements but also shaping future energy options 
for  the  Country.  This  Alternative  RE  Policy  aims  to  contribute  to 
sustainable  development,  climate  change  mitigation,  energy  and 
economic security, and conservation of environment in the Kingdom. 
Management  of  energy  demand  shall  be  addressed  in  the  Energy 
Efficiency Policy to be developed separately. 
  3
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
1.11  This  Alternative  Renewable  Energy  Policy  aims  to  promote  the 
following clean RE technologies: solar (both PV and thermal), wind, 
bio-energy, geo-thermal, pico/micro/mini/small hydro and waste to 
energy (WTE). This Policy shall cover, inter alia, the following areas of 
RE interventions: 
 
a) 
Stand-alone systems,
 
b) 
Decentralized Distributed Generation (DDG)  
systems,
 
 
 
   
c) 
Grid-connected RE systems,
 
d) 
Fossil fuel substitution through green energy  
sources like bio-fuels, electric and hybrid vehicles.
 
 
 
   
1.12  Renewable  Energy  Technology  in  this  Policy  shall  cover  solar  (both 
PV  and  thermal),  wind,  bio-energy,  geo-thermal,  pico/micro/mini/
small  hydro  up  to  25  MW  and  waste  to  energy  (WTE).  While  large 
hydropower (above 25 MW) is considered as renewable energy, it is 
not under the scope of this Policy.
1.13  The Alternative Renewable Energy Policy strives to ensure adequate 
provision and extensive use of modern energy services in rural areas, 
which  have  been  largely  dependent  on  firewood  and  kerosene  for 
cooking, heating and lighting purposes. 
1.14  The  Alternative  Renewable  Energy  Policy  also  strives  to  optimise 
and  conserve  the  usage  of  grid-based  power  through  promotion 
of dispersed energy generation options such as solar thermal, solar 
photovoltaic  and  other  stand-alone  systems.  In  remote  locations/
rural areas, community-based initiatives in the form of Decentralised 
Distributed  Generation  (DDG)  or  any  other  initiatives  leading 
to  promotion  of  RE  sources  shall  be  dealt  on  a  priority  basis.  RE 
applications  such  as  solar  photovoltaic  and  thermal  application  in 
government buildings, institutions, hotels, and the residential sector 
shall also be promoted under this Policy. 
  4
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
2.  OBJECTIVE OF THE POLICY
2.1 
In view of rising energy demand, the reliance on a single electricity 
source, increasing fossil fuel imports, and low hydropower production 
in winter months, it is critical to diversify the energy mix by harnessing 
other domestic sources of clean renewable energy to ensure energy 
security, economic development, and protection of the environment. 
2.2 
Recognizing  the  above  premise,  the  long-term  and  short-term 
objectives of the RE Policy have been stipulated as follows: 
A)  
Long-term objectives:
a)  Contribute to energy security and broaden the energy portfolio 
 
through utilization of available renewable energy potential;
b)   Reduce GHG emissions and contribute to climate change  
 
mitigation; 
c)   Promote green growth and enhance sustainable socio-economic 
 
development;
d)   Develop productive manufacturing capacity in the RE Sector; and
 
e)   Develop a framework for Carbon Trading Mechanisms.
 
B) 
Short-term objectives:
a)  Harness  the  potential  of  RE  resources  and  adoption  of  RE 
 
technologies in the Country;
b)  Develop  RE  Master  Plan  for  each  of  the  RE  technologies  by 
mapping capacity, generation potential and cost of generation by 
location across the Kingdom;
 
c)  Design  appropriate  tariffs  for  various  RE  technologies  to  offer 
secure and stable market to investors and project developers with 
transparent, guaranteed and time-bound incentives provided by 
the Government;
 
  5
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
d)  Enable,  encourage  and  facilitate  both  public  and  private  sector 
 
participation in the development of RE; 
e)  Set realistic target for RE in the energy-mix;
 
f)  Support and promote Research & Development in RE technologies 
 
with long term potentials as viable energy resources;
g)  Institutionalize the development of national and local capacities 
and  capabilities  for  enhanced  and  optimum  utilization  of  RE 
systems;
 
h)  Establish  the  necessary  administrative  processes,  basic  physical 
infrastructure  and  institutional  mechanisms  to  implement  the 
provisions of this Policy; and
 
i)  Strengthen regulatory functions in the RE sector.
 
3.   TARGET
This  Policy  sets  out  a  preliminary  minimum  target  of  20  MW  by  2025 
through mix of renewable energy technologies. This minimum target may 
be  increased  following  more  detailed  evaluations  of  resource  potentials. 
Specific targets include:
3.1  
Electricity Generation
a)  Solar – 5 MW
 
b)  Wind – 5 MW
 
c)  Biomass – 5 MW
 
3.2  
Energy Generation
a)  Biomass Energy System - 3 MW equivalent
 
b)  Solar Thermal System - 3 MW equivalent
 
  6
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
3.3  
Fossil Fuel Energy substitution in Transport Sector
a)  1000 kilolitres of oil equivalent      111,000MWh 
 
=˜
b)  20% of the state owned and 10% of the private vehicle fleet 
 
shall be encouraged to run on clean and green fuels by 2025 
 
 
The above target does not include micro/mini/small hydro, which shall be 
developed separately on need basis.
4. 
TITLE, OPERATIVE PERIOD AND 
ENFORCEMENT
 
4.1 
This  Policy  shall  be  known  as  “Alternative  Renewable  Energy  Policy 
2013”.
4.2 
This Policy shall come into effect from 8th April 2013 and will remain 
in force until superseded or modified by another Policy.
4.3 
All RE projects shall be governed by this Policy.
5. 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENT
5.1 
The institutional arrangement outlines the roles and responsibilities 
of relevant organizations in the promotion of RE.
Department of Renewable Energy (DRE)
5.2 
The  Department  of  Renewable  Energy  (DRE)  under  the  Ministry  of 
Economic  Affairs  (MoEA)  shall  be  the  “Nodal  Agency”  or  “NA”  for 
implementation of the RE Policy. The NA shall be the focal point for 
sustainable energy development and promotion of RE sources.
  7
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
5.3 
The NA shall undertake the following functions:
(i) 
Promote  a  ‘Centre  of  Excellence’  at  the  Royal  University  of 
Bhutan  and  in  association  with  the  prominent  in  stitutions  of 
the  Kingdom.  This  Centre  would  carry  out  advanced  courses, 
applied R&D, work on different renewable energy technologies 
(RETs) and provide training to the manpower employed in the 
RE sector; 
 
(ii)  Administer and manage the newly created Renewable Energy 
 
Development Fund;
(iii)  Serve  as  the  central  coordination  and  implementation  body 
for the development of a RE Master Plan by mapping resource 
potential and cost of generation for different RE technologies, 
and, locations across the Kingdom in collaboration with relevant 
agencies and the private sector;
 
(iv)  Coordinate  action  plans  and  link  together  the  activities  of 
different  agencies  or  organizations,  to  ensure  sustainable 
energy planning;
 
(v) 
Facilitate  project  developers  in  securing  required  clearances 
from various government agencies;
 
(vi) 
Facilitate PPA with the concerned distribution utilities including 
appointment  of  trader(s)  as  consolidator  for  purchases  and 
sales  of  RE  generation,  subject  to  fulfillment  of  Licensing 
requirement under the Electricity Act;
 
(vii) 
Issue  policy  directives  for  adoption  of  Renewable  Energy 
Obligations or other policy measures as deemed appropri ate;
 
  8
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
(viii)  Promote  awareness  of  RE  and  other  clean  and  green  energy 
technologies,  and  integrate  their  development  within  overall 
national energy policy and development; 
 
(ix)  Create market opportunities and appropriate start-up business 
models  like  energy  services  providers/companies  to  provide 
renewable  energy  services  in  a  sustainable  manner  through 
process innovations;
 
(x) 
Facilitate  allotment  of  land,  access  to  water  and  approval  of 
power evacuation plan;
 
(xi)  Assist  in  obtaining  various  clearances  related  to  energy 
plantation  for  use  as  supplementary  fuel  in  case  of  biomass 
power plant and Waste-to-Energy Schemes;
 
(xii)  Develop  appropriate  subsidy  and  support  mechanisms  to 
make RE a viable energy source, including the introduction of 
Renewable  Purchase  Obligations,  amongst  other  policy  tools; 
and
 
(xiii)  Carry  out  inventory  of  renewable  energy  technologies  on  an 
 
annual basis. 
Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA)
5.4 
BEA shall create a regulatory framework for the RE Sector as per the 
provisions  of  the  Electricity  Act  to  encourage  electricity  generation 
from RE sources.
5.5 
Besides  these  functions,  the  BEA  shall  design  and  develop  the 
following:
(i) 
Feed-in-tariff as per the principles contained in this Policy;  
and
 
 
  9
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
(ii)  Norms  related  to  grid  connectivity/interfacing  and  load 
 
dispatch, etc.
Ministry of Agriculture & Forests (MoAF)
5.6  MoAF shall collaborate with DRE to generate energy from the pico 
and  micro  hydropower/biomass/bio-fuels/biogas  resources  in  the 
country. 
5.7  MoAF  shall  collaborate  with  DRE  in  R&D  for  development  of 
sustainable bio-energy technologies.
5.8  MoAF  shall  be  responsible  for  providing  sustainable  source  of 
biomass as a source of renewable energy fuel. 
National Environment Commission (NEC)
5.9  NEC  shall  provide  support  for  the  promotion  and  development  of 
renewable energy projects.
5.10  NEC shall have the overall coordination responsibility with regard to 
water issues in its capacity as the custodian of Water Act.
5.11  NEC  shall  ensure  expedient,  efficient,  and  priority  processing  and 
issuance of clearances/permits to help promote the development of 
renewable energy projects.
Ministry of Information and Communication (MoIC)
5.12  MoIC shall collaborate with NA/MoEA and provide policy and other 
support towards substitution of fossil fuel by green energy sources in 
the transport sector.
  10
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
Thromdes
5.13  Thromdes  shall  collaborate  with  NA/MoEA  and  provide  policy  and 
other  support  towards  substitution  of  fossil  fuel  by  green  energy 
sources in urban transport, street lighting and district heating systems.
5.14  Thromdes shall provide policy and other support towards conversion 
of waste to energy and for promotion of green buildings.
6. 
IMPLEMENTATION MECHANISM
6.1   The  implementation  mechanism  will  include  the  mapping  of  RE 
resources,  identification  of  potential  project  sites,  preparation  of 
techno-economic  feasibility  studies,  allocation  and  development  of 
RE projects.
a)		
Government	Identified	RE	Projects
6.2   The NA will develop the RE Master Plan within three years after the 
adoption of the Policy.
6.3   The  RE  Master  Plan  will  include  resource  analysis,  potential  project 
sites,  and  estimated  project  scale  for  different  Renewable  Energy 
Technologies (RETs).
6.4   The  NA  shall  then  undertake  preparatory  studies  for  identified 
projects  up  to  at  least  the  pre-feasibility  stage  to  ascertain  their 
viability. These studies shall cover the technical, financial, economic 
and environmental aspects of RE projects.
  11
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
6.5   The  NA  shall  make  Pre-feasibility  Reports  available  to  the  general 
public  through  the  website  of  the  NA.  Interested  parties  may  be 
permitted  to  bid  for  these  projects  as  per  guidelines  issued  by  the 
NA. The prospective developer will have the right, at his own cost, to 
examine, evaluate and to carry out additional studies to make his own 
assessment about viability of the project, as part of his due diligence 
process.
b)	Allotment	process	for	Projects	Identified	by	NA
Grid-Connected Small Hydropower Projects
6.6   The  small  hydropower  projects  under  the  RE  Master  Plan  shall  be 
allocated  on  the  basis  of  open  competitive  bidding  to  the  project 
developer  following  the  bidding  guidelines,  rules  and  regulations 
prescribed by the NA.
6.7  
For domestic off-take projects, the bidding shall be based on lowest 
tariff  offered  by  the  bidder  while  for  export  oriented  projects,  the 
bidding shall be based on the highest royalty energy being offered, 
provided the winning bidder possess the required technical capacity 
to develop and maintain the project.
6.8  
If the allocation of the project is not achieved through the bidding 
process,  the  Government  may  direct  the  State-owned  agencies  for 
development.
6.9   The Government may also direct the State-owned utilities/agencies 
for development of Small Hydropower Projects for strategic reasons.
6.10   Physical  construction  of  small  hydropower  projects  shall  prioritize 
the employment of national labour. However, if necessary, technical 
support may be outsourced to foreign nationals or firms.
  12
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
Grid-connected Other RE Projects
6.11  The  NA  shall  release  a  public  Request  for  Proposal  (RfP)  inviting 
prospective developers to submit project proposals. These documents 
shall  comprise  the  requisite  details  about  the  proposed  project  to 
facilitate proposal development by project developers.
6.12   The  RfP  will  have  pre-qualification  criteria  to  evaluate  the  technical 
and financial capacities of the prospective developers in line with the 
requirements of the project. Weightage and scores of technical and 
financial criteria shall be specified in the RfP. The NA shall establish 
minimum  qualifying  score  for  developers  at  the  pre-qualification 
stage.  The  applicants  shall  be  short-listed  based  on  the  evaluation, 
subject  to  scoring  the  minimum  qualifying  marks  at  the  pre-
qualification  stage.  Only  short-listed  applicants  shall  be  invited  to 
participate in the price bidding process.
6.13   The price bid will contain the offered price of electricity to the grid. 
The developer with least cost bid within the range acceptable to the 
NA defined in the bidding document will be invited to negotiate for 
the allocation of the project.
6.14   If there are two or more identical bids with same scores at this stage, 
allotment shall be based on the higher score obtained during the pre-
qualification stage. If the scores are same even at this stage, the two 
bidders shall be requested to bid again based on additional criteria as 
specified by the NA, till one emerges as the winning bidder.
6.15   In  the  case  of  Biomass  Power  and  Waste  to  Energy,  the  NA  shall 
determine the maximum use of fossil fuel for biomass power plants 
during  the  lean  period  in  a  year  and  shall  facilitate  the  process  of 
clearance  for  procurement  of  such  fuels  on  a  priority  basis  for  the 
Biomass Power Producers.
  13
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
6.16   If  specified  in  the  RfP,  the  selected  developer  shall  reimburse  the 
expenditure  incurred,  if  any  by  the  Government,  for  infrastructure 
work of the project at the time of signing the Project Development 
Agreement (PDA).
6.17   The selected developer shall sign a PDA with the NA. The PDA shall 
outline  the  commitments  and  obligations  of  the  parties  and  will 
provide  a  timeline  for  the  selected  Developer  to  prepare  a  Detail 
Project Report/Detail Project Proposal (DPR/DPP).
6.18   The quality of DPR/DPP, Construction, and Operation & Maintenance 
practices shall conform to International Standards and Specifications, 
and BEA norms and shall be enforced by the Government.
6.19   After  the  DPR/DPP  is  approved  by  the  NA,  the  selected  developer 
shall be awarded the Project through an Allocation Agreement (AA) 
with the NA. This AA shall be the key legal instrument, specifying the 
rights and obligations of the parties. This AA shall also include time 
schedules  for  obtaining  necessary  legal/administrative/technical 
approvals, financial closure, construction, commissioning, operation 
and maintenance of the project.
c)		
Self-identified	RE	Projects
6.20   Private  agencies  or  individual  shall  be  allowed  and  encouraged  to 
identify  and  prepare  studies  up  to  DPR  for  Micro,  Mini  and  Small 
hydropower projects to a maximum of 5 MW and DPP for other RE 
projects, following the guidelines prescribed by the NA.
6.21   The  project  developer  undertaking  pre-feasibility  study/DPR/DPP 
and survey activities shall obtain the permit as per the provisions of 
Electricity Act.
  14
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
6.22   All costs related to self identification of projects shall be the liability of 
the developer and the Government shall not be responsible for this.
6.23  The  Guideline  for  the  preparation  of  DPRs/DPPs  shall  specify 
detailed  element(s)  to  be  studied  and/or  considered,  processing 
fees,  conditions  of  acceptance  of  DPRs/DPPs  for  review,  criteria  for 
examination and allocation.
d)	
Broad	guidelines	for	Preparation	of	DPR/DPP	under	self-identified	 
RE Projects
6.24   The  detailed  guidelines  for  the  Preparation  of  DPR/DPP  will  be 
issued by the NA which shall, among others, include an overview of 
the  project,  justification  of  the  project  from  an  energy  supply  side, 
basin development plan, survey and investigation of hydrology and 
reservoirs in the case of hydropower projects, inter-district and inter-
national  aspects,  power  potential  and  planned  capacity,  design  of 
civil, electrical and mechanical structures, transmission of power and 
communication  facilities,  construction  programme  and  planning, 
project  organization,  infrastructure  facilities,  environmental  and 
ecological  aspects,  cost  estimates,  allocation  of  costs,  economic 
evaluation,  future  utilization  of  buildings,  and  other  benefits  and 
clearances/inputs from relevant agencies as prescribed by the NA.
e)		
Submission	of	DPRs/DPPs	under	self-identified	RE	Projects
6.25   The Developer intending to set up a renewable energy project shall 
submit the DPR/DPP to the NA for its concurrence.
f)		
Allocation	process	for	self-identified	RE	projects
6.26   After the DPRs/DPPs have been endorsed by the NA, the developer 
may submit the endorsed DPRs/DPPs to the NA for allocation of the 
project.
  15
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
6.27  The  Pico  Hydropower  Project(s)  and  Micro  Hydropower  Project(s) 
shall  be  allocated  for  the  individual  consumption  or  use  by  the 
communities/firms provided it meets the allocation criteria prescribed 
by the NA. Any surplus energy shall be allowed to sell to third parties.
6.28   For all Hydropower Projects, the developer will be required to pay the 
Application Processing fee and Security Deposit as specified by the 
NA.
6.29  Evaluation  criteria  for  identification  and  approval  of  suitable  and 
competent project developer(s) shall be specified by the NA, both for 
the self-identified hydropower and other RE projects.
6.30   If allocation of project is done for domestic supply, the purchase of 
energy generated from such RE Projects, except hydropower projects, 
shall be guaranteed by the Government under Renewable Purchase 
Obligation and at the tariff approved by BEA.
6.31 
If  the  allocation  of  projects  is  done  for  export  purpose,  such  RE 
projects  shall  require keeping provisions  for  domestic  supply up to 
20%  of  the  production  if  required  by  the  Government  at  the  price 
determined  by  BEA  for  the  purpose  of  enhancing  domestic  energy 
supply security.
7   DECENTRALIZED DISTRIBUTED GENERATION (DDG) 
PROJECTS
7.1   DDG  RE  projects  shall  be  developed  for  provision  of  energy-based 
services  to  remote  and  dispersed  villages,  which  are  not  electrified 
or not connected to the grid. The allocation of such projects shall be 
based on guidelines, rules and regulations prescribed by the NA.
  16
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
7.2   All  RE  projects  constructed  under  the  Government  funding  as 
distributed power generation source shall remain as the property of 
the Government and management of the plant shall be transferred to 
communities, wherever feasible.
7.3  
For the RE projects which are constructed under Government funding 
and managed by the community, the tariff shall be set to meet the 
operation and maintenance costs only.
7.4   The  Government  shall  provide  back  up  support  for  RE  projects 
developed under Government funding if there is a major breakdown 
and requires substantial funds for restoring the plant.
8  
STAND-ALONE RE PROJECTS
8.1   Standalone RE systems/scheme/programme based on RE technologies 
(solar  PV,  solar  thermal,  pico  hydro,  micro  hydro,  wind,  solar  home 
lighting  system,  solar  lanterns,  biogas  plants,  passive  cooling 
systems,  biomass,  cook-stoves  etc.  for  processing  appliances)  or  a 
hybrid of RE technologies for the provision of decentralized energy 
for households/communities shall be undertaken and/or supported 
by the NA.
8.2   Civil  Societies,  NGOs,  Communities,  Companies  and  Individuals 
based in Bhutan may initiate and undertake the stand-alone projects 
based on the renewable energy technologies or combination of such 
technologies depending upon the available resources and demand of 
the particular location following the Guidelines prescribed by the NA.
8.3  
For  the  accelerated  deployment  of  solar  thermal  system  in  order 
to  diversify  the  energy  sources  and  to  reduce  the  consumption  of 
conventional  energy,  other  policy  support  mechanisms,  including 
financial  support,  capacity  building  and  promotional  incentives  will 
be developed.
  17
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
8.4   The NA shall explore innovative processes and technologies to make 
the stand-alone RET and its related services accessible.
8.5   Process of allotment shall follow the guidelines, rules and regulations 
prescribed by the NA.
8.6   The minimum capacity of RET shall be prescribed by the NA for which 
no specific clearances shall be required from the Government.
9  
FOSSIL FUEL SUBSTITUTION BY GREEN ENERGY 
SOURCES
9.1   Research and development activities shall be undertaken to explore 
substitution  of  fossil  fuels  by  green  energy  transport  fuel  sources 
such  as  electricity  and  bio-fuels,  and  technologies  such  as  electric, 
hybrid electric vehicles, and other emerging technologies.
9.2  
In coordination with relevant Ministries and Departments, necessary 
infrastructure  to  support  the  use  of  electricity  as  a  source  of  fuel 
supply  in  the  transport  sector  will  be  examined.  This  will  aim  to 
promote the use of electric and hybrid electric vehicles to meet public 
sector, commercial and private sector, and individual transport needs.
9.3   Policies  that  promote  the  purchase  and  use  of  electric  and  hybrid 
electric vehicles will be explored, including but not limited to vehicle 
purchase  incentives,  dedicated  priority  parking,  and  other  priority 
access policies.
9.4   Research and Development shall be carried out to introduce a more 
comprehensive  and  reliable  mass  transport  system,  where  feasible, 
including  electric  tram  networks,  electric  and  hybrid  electric  buses 
and other clean mass transport options.
  18
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
9.5 
Bike-lanes shall be introduced in cities and towns, where feasible, to 
encourage biking/cycling and walking.
9.6 
Research  and  Development  Activities  to  explore  the  potential  for 
domestic production and use of bio-fuels (e.g. bio-ethanol and bio-
diesel) using organic matter will be undertaken, ensuring that such 
actions do not affect the food security of the Country.
9.7   The use of waste as energy source for other processes and conversion 
of waste to energy will be evaluated.
9.8   The Government shall gradually phase out subsidy on fossil fuels to 
encourage conservation and switch to alternative fuel sources.
10   PROJECT CLEARANCE
10.1   NA shall facilitate necessary clearances for RE projects.
11  
INVESTMENT MODEL
Life of the Project
All RE projects except micro/mini/small hydro
11.1   All RE projects for electricity generation (except for mini, micro and 
small  hydro)  shall  be  developed  under  BOO  (Build,  Own,  Operate) 
model. The projects shall be allocated for the following period for the 
purpose of determining the economic life: wind - 20 years, biomass - 
20 years and solar power project (PV and thermal) -25 years, excluding 
the construction period.
  19
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
11.2   The  NA  shall  recommend  for  renewal  of  license  for  operation  of 
the plant beyond the economic life of the project on the request of 
project developer, based on such terms and conditions as determined 
by the NA. 
Micro/Mini/Small Hydro Projects
11.3   The micro, mini and small hydro projects shall be developed under 
Build-Own-Operate-Transfer  (BOOT)  model.  The  project  shall  be 
allotted  to  a  developer  for  a  concession  period  up  to  30  years, 
excluding the construction period.
11.4   Based  on  the  performance  of  the  incumbent  operator  and  the 
terms  and  conditions  to  be  agreed  upon,  the  concession  period 
can  be  extended  for  a  maximum  of  15  years.  At  the  end  of  the 
concession period, the ownership of the project including all existing 
installations,  property  and  rights  needed  for  power  generation  in 
working conditions shall be transferred to the Government without 
any compensation to the developer.
11.5   Other than export oriented small hydropower projects, the developers 
of RE Projects shall not be required to provide royalty energy.
12   PROJECT OWNERSHIP
Grid connected, DDG and Stand-alone RE projects
12.1   Investments in RE projects are open for investments from the private 
sector including FDI.
12.2   FDI shall be allowed only as minority shareholding for development 
of small hydropower projects.
12.3   FDI shall not be permitted in micro and mini hydropower projects. 
  20
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
13   LOCK-IN-PERIOD
13.1   The  developer  developing  the  project  shall  provide  information  on 
the  promoters  and  their  shareholding  in  the  company  to  the  NA 
indicating  the  controlling  shareholding  before  signing  of  the  PDA 
with the NA.
13.2   The  “Developer”  identified  as  the  “Principal  Developer”  in  the 
application  for  allotment  of  RE  projects,  having  a  lead  role  and 
possessing  sufficient  financial  strength,  is  required  to  hold  the 
controlling  shareholding  in  the  Special  Purpose  Vehicle  (SPV) 
developing the project.
13.3   The  “lock-in-period”  shall  be  applicable  for  the  first  “Three  Years” 
of  the  project  life  from  the  Commercial  Operation  Date  (COD).  No 
change  in  the  shareholding  in  the  SPV  Company  developing  the 
project shall be permitted from the date of signing the PDA till the 
end of the third year from the date of commissioning of commercial 
operation.
13.4   After  successful  completion  of  three  years  of  plant  operation,  the 
project developer may divest the equity share.
14   WATER USE CHARGES
14.1   There shall be no water user charges other than the Royalty energy.
15   RECYCLING AND MANAGEMENT OF WASTE
15.1   All the waste generated from the promotion of RE shall be managed 
under  the  provision  of  the  prevailing  Waste  Management  Acts, 
Policies and Regulations in the Kingdom.
  21
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
16   FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT (FDI)
16.1   RE  Projects  eligible  for  FDI  shall  be  dealt  as  per  the  prevailing  FDI 
Policy,  rules  and  regulations  of  the  country  and  provisions  of  this 
Policy.
17   LAND ACQUISITION AND COMPENSATION
17.1   For all RE Projects, land acquisition and compensation shall be as per 
the Land Act.
17.2   For  projects  that  are  to  be  transferred  to  Government  after  the 
concession period, all land required for the project shall be facilitated 
by  the  NA  and  the  cost  will  be  charged  to  the  project  through  an 
annual lease rent during the concession period.
17.3   For  all  other  projects,  the  NA  shall  facilitate  the  project  developer 
in  acquiring  the  identified  government  land.  For  private  land,  the 
project developers will deal directly with the private land-owners with 
necessary support from NA.
18   FINANCIAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
18.1   To  render  the  services  required  to  promote  the  RE  sector,  the  NA 
shall  utilize  funds  from  two  sources  –  budgetary  support  from  the 
Government and the Renewable Energy Development Fund (REDF), 
stipulated  under the  Bhutan  Sustainable  Hydropower  Development 
Policy and established under this Policy.
18.2   For the activities mandated by the Government as per Five Year Plans, 
the NA shall utilize the budgetary support from the Government.
  22
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
19   RENEWABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT FUND (REDF)
19.1   The Renewable Energy Development Fund (REDF) is herby established.
19.2   The  primary  objective  of  the  REDF  shall  be  to  provide  financial 
assistance for creating a favorable investment climate for RE in the 
Country.
19.3   Funds for REDF shall come from the following sources:
a)  A part of up-front premiums received from the large hydro project 
 
developers;
b)  A part of the revenue earned from sale of royalty energy from the 
generating companies and RE Projects as per the provisions of the 
Economic Development Policy and RE Policy as may be applicable;
 
c)  Grants  from  International  Development  Agencies  and  other 
 
donors;
d)  Electricity and CDM revenue earned from RE projects developed 
 
by the NA;
e)  Any voluntary contribution from individuals or corporate agencies;
 
f)  Any cess on import of fossil fuel;
 
g)  Application  processing  fees  collected  under  self-identified  RE 
 
Projects under this Policy;
h)  Other sources of fund that the Government may propose through 
 
additional mechanism/arrangement as deemed appropriate.
20   UTILIZATION OF REDF
20.1   The REDF shall support all activities which are considered appropriate 
by  the  NA  for  the  development  of  the  RE  sector  and  creation  of  a 
facilitating investment climate.
  23
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
20.2   The  REDF  shall  provide  support  to  sustain  RE  programmes  and 
projects where deemed necessary.
20.3   REDF shall provide support to carry out Research and Development 
activities to promote Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency.
20.4   The NA shall administer and manage the funds in the REDF.
20.5   The donations made to REDF and income earned from investment of 
REDF shall be exempted from taxes.
20.6  The  NA  shall  prepare  REDF  management  guidelines,  rules  and 
regulations  within  one  year  from  the  issuance  of  the  RE  Policy  in 
consultation with identified financial institutions.
21   PROMOTIONAL MEASURES
General
21.1   The Government shall provide technical and budgetary supports to 
organize  publicity  and  awareness  campaigns,  seminars,  workshops, 
symposia, business meetings, training programmes, studies, survey, 
etc. as deem appropriate by the NA.
21.2   The NA shall provide capital subsidy and/or grants to finance small 
scale individual and community investments in RE Projects as deemed 
necessary and appropriate by the NA that contribute to the following 
objectives:
a)  Renders  RET  and  RET  services  accessible  and  affordable  to  the 
 
rural poor and marginalized sections of the society.
b)  Accelerate  up-take  and  adoption  of  RE  technologies  through 
reduction of up-front investment cost or shift capital expenditure 
costs from the end-users.
 
  24
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
c)  Benefits exceed the cost of support.
 
d)  Promotes sustainability of the RE Projects and societal benefits.
 
21.3   Any RET systems promoted under this Policy shall not be allowed to 
be re-sold or transferred by the beneficiaries unless approved by the 
NA.
For Project Developers, Manufacturers and System Integrators
21.4   The  project  developers,  manufacturers  and  systems  integrators  of 
RE Projects, except small hydropower projects, shall be exempt from 
payment of corporate or business income tax for a period of ten years 
from the date of commercial operation of the RE project.
21.5   An additional five years income tax holiday shall be given to Project 
developers,  manufactures  and  system  integrators  of  RE  projects 
established in the remote areas of the Kingdom as notified by the NA 
based on poverty levels and other strategic reasons.
21.6   The NA shall, wherever required and feasible, facilitate allocation of 
space required for manufacturing or fabricating solar water heating 
systems,  accessories  for  biogas  plants,  improved  cook  stoves,  and 
other RE technologies approved and/or supported by the NA.
Fiscal Incentives for RE Projects
21.7   The  Project  Developer,  manufacturers  and  system  integrators  of 
RE  shall  be  exempt  from  payment  of  all  import  duties  and  Bhutan 
sales tax on import of plants and equipment as direct inputs to the 
project  during  the  construction  period,  applicable  till  such  time  as 
determined by the Government.
  25
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
21.8   Sales tax and customs duty exemption shall be granted for purchase 
of  spare  parts  for  RE  projects  promoted  under  7.2  and  21.2  and 
recommended by the NA.
21.9   Reinvestment  by  companies  shall  be  allowed  as  tax  deductable 
expenses  up  to  a  maximum  of  25%  of  the  total  reinvestment. 
Reinvestment  allowance  shall  be  given  only  once  for  every  new 
investment is undertaken.
21.10  Expenditure  incurred  in  RE-based  R&D  including  those  by  patrons 
shall be allowed as tax-deductible expenditure in whole.
21.11  RE  projects/schemes/investment  provided  with  incentive  or  other 
forms of benefits as per this Policy shall not be eligible for additional 
incentives under the Cottage and Small Industries (CSI).
22   CARBON MARKET MECHANISM
22.1   All  RE  projects  shall  be  encouraged  to  avail  benefits  from  Clean 
Development Mechanism or any future international carbon market 
mechanisms  to  reduce  GHG  emissions.  The  NA  shall  facilitate 
requisite approvals from various Government agencies to enable the 
developers to register the projects under such mechanisms.
22.2   The NA shall facilitate bundling of smaller RE projects to avail benefits 
from such mechanisms.
22.3   All  benefits  from  such  mechanisms  shall  be  accrued  to  the  project 
developers. 
  26
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
23   DELIVERY MECHANISM
DDG projects
Tariff determination
23.1   BEA shall determine the tariff for various RE technologies.
23.2   The  existing  DDG  projects,  owned  by  the  NA  (including  ones  that 
are  handed  over  to  community  for  O&M)  or  community  or  private 
developers shall have the option to sell electricity to the distribution 
utility once the national grid reaches the area. The distribution utility 
shall  be  obligated  to  purchase  power  from  such  plants  as  may  be 
directed by the Government.
23.3   Once the national grid reaches to the area, for the project developed 
by the NA, BPC may be directed to takeover such projects for O&M 
against a fee to be paid by the NA.
23.4   The  subsidy  shall  be  determined  for  such  projects  taking  into 
consideration  the  project  cost  at  the  beginning  of  the  project, 
subsidy availed by the projects, returns accrued by the project so far, 
remaining life term of the project, and a normative return as per the 
tariff determination guidelines, rules and regulations.
23.5   Payments against the sale of electricity from the projects owned by 
NA shall be deposited into the REDF.
Licensing requirement
23.6   The RE project developers shall apply for license as per the provision 
under the Electricity Act.
23.7   The  Government  may  facilitate  provision  of  Composite  License 
(electricity, water, trade, bulk supply etc.)
  27
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
Grid-connected RE projects
Off-take of electricity
23.8   The  Project  Developer  may  contract  the  electricity  generated  after 
complying  with  licensing  regulations,  fulfillment  of  technical  and 
safety  parameters  in  accordance  with  the  existing  grid  code  and 
applicable regulations as amended from time to time.
23.9   In the case of an Independent Power Producer (IPP), the entire power 
may be sold to any consumer or willing distribution company. Subject 
to  approval  of  the  Government,  the  power  may  also  be  exported 
through designated agencies or as per directives of the Government. 
However,  the  distribution  utility,  in  whose  jurisdiction  the  domestic 
off-take power plant is located, shall have the first right to purchase 
of power.
23.10  If feasible, the sale of energy to a third party or switching from one 
third  party  consumer  to  other  third  party  consumer  shall  also  be 
permitted by the NA, subject to approval of BEA.
Tariff determination
23.11  BEA  shall  determine  tariffs  for  grid-connected  projects  as  per  the 
provision of the Electricity Act.
23.12  For tariff determination purposes, any capital subsidy and subsidy on 
tariff provided to RE projects shall be factored.
23.13  Other forms of electricity purchase from RE projects such as export 
of  power  or  third  party  sale  shall  be  based  on  mutually  agreed 
rates  between  the  buyer  and  the  seller  through  a  Power  Purchase 
Agreement.
23.14  The NA may consider the appointment of a consolidated off-taker(s) 
for export or domestic purposes.
  28
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
Power Purchase Agreement (PPA)
23.15  The  NA  shall  develop  model  PPAs  for  different  RE  technologies  to 
facilitate signing PPAs at lower transaction cost.
Load dispatch
23.16  All RE projects approved by the NA in the Country shall be considered 
as  “must  dispatch”  power  projects  and  shall  enjoy  the  benefit  of 
priority dispatch. The priority dispatch status of the RE projects shall 
be subject to system reliability, safety and grid capacity.
23.17  RE projects shall not be subject to scheduling and dispatch except for 
10 MW and above biomass and RE-based cogeneration projects.
Transmission
23.18  The  transmission  utility  shall  provide  transmission  access  to  the 
Project Developer.
23.19  The developer shall be responsible for laying transmission lines and 
connect to the nearest grid sub-station of the utility beyond which the 
utility  company  will  provide  the  transmission  facilities  for  wheeling 
the electricity within the Country.
23.20  The  developer  shall  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  utility 
company  for  the  transmission  service  and  shall  not  be  required  to 
pay  transmission  and  wheeling  charges  except  for  export  oriented 
projects where such charges as determined by the BEA from time to 
time for usage of the utility’s transmission system shall apply.
23.21  The  Developer  shall  be  liable  for  penalty,  if  they  do  not  utilize  the 
allocated  transmission  network  capacity  as  prescribed  by  the 
regulation in force.
  29
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
Other Regulatory Provisions
23.22  The  RE  projects  shall  be  required  to  comply  with  all  regulations, 
codes,  and  standards  pertaining  to  construction,  operation  and 
maintenance of the plant as per the applicable laws.
23.23  The NA shall determine the Renewable Energy Obligation (REO) for 
the  obligated  agencies  in  order  to  ascertain  a  long-term  and  real 
market for grid-interactive RE projects.
24   MONITORING AND EVALUATION
24.1  The  NA  shall  devise  a  comprehensive  monitoring  &  evaluation 
framework for RE programmes. It shall also undertake impact studies 
at regular intervals and make arrangement to monitor and evaluate 
the RE programmes.
25   AMENDMENTS
25.1   The  Government  may  amend  this  Policy  as  and  when  required. 
However, the terms and conditions of agreements, which are in effect 
for the existing projects, shall not be subjected to these amendments.
26   DEVIATION FROM THE POLICY PROVISIONS
26.1   Deviation from the policy guidelines shall be treated as default and 
in  such  cases,  the  projects  shall  be  taken  over  by  the  Government 
following appropriate legal procedures applicable in the Country.
  30
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
27  
INTERPRETATION OF THE POLICY
27.1   In  the  event  of  conflict  of  interpretation,  the  Ministry  of  Economic 
Affairs shall on behalf of the Government, be the authority to interpret 
various provisions of this Policy, which shall be final and binding.
28  DEFINITION
1.  
“Agreement” outlines the implementation agreement signed between 
the  Royal  Government  of  Bhutan  and  the  Developer  and  broadly 
consists of the following:
•  Project  Commissioning  Schedule  and  Construction  Period 
Requirements from the parties as per the approved DPR and/or 
relevant document; and
 
•  Terms and Conditions for the project during the operation period, 
 
i.e. from the Commercial Operation Date of the Project.
2.  
“Bhutan Electricity Authority (BEA)” or “Authority” means the authority 
of that name established pursuant to Part 2 of the Electricity Act of 
Bhutan, 2001.
3.  
“Bid” means an offer to participate in the project, made in accordance 
with  the  terms  and  conditions  set  out  in  a  document  inviting  such 
offers.
4.  
“Bid Security” means the deposit of an unconditional bank guarantee; 
or  an  irrevocable  letter  of  credit;  or  a  cashier‟s  or  certified  check, 
submitted  with  a  bid  and  serving  as  guarantee  to  the  Government 
that  the  bidder,  if  awarded  the  project,  will  execute  the  project 
in  accordance  with  the  bidding  requirements  and  the  contract 
documents.
  31
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
5.  
“Bike-lane” is a general term denoting any trail, path, part of a highway, 
surfaced  or  smooth  shoulder  or  any  other  travel  way  specifically 
signed, marked, or otherwise designated for bicycle travel.
6.  
“Bio-fuel  transesterification”  means  the  process  used  to  convert 
extracted oil to bio diesel.
7.  
“Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM)”  is  an  arrangement  under 
the  Kyoto  Protocol  allowing  industrialised  countries  (called  Annex 
1  countries)  with  a  greenhouse  gas  reduction  commitment  to 
invest  in  projects  that  reduce  emissions  in  developing  countries  as 
an  alternative  to  more  expensive  emission  reductions  in  their  own 
countries.
8.  
“Command Area” shall mean the area allocated to a biomass project 
developer for procurement of biomass. The Nodal Agency shall allow 
only one biomass project developer to set up project in the assigned 
command area to avoid fuel risks. The size of the command area shall 
depend on the size of the biomass plant.
9.  
“Commercial Operation Date (COD)” means the commercial operation 
date  reckoned  as  the  date  on  which  each  unit  of  the  generating 
plant  and  equipment  is  jointly  declared  as  commissioned  by  the 
Government and the Project Developer.
10.  
“Decentralised  Distributed  Generation  (DDG)”  means  generation  of 
electricity  from  various  RE  energy  sources  for  local  consumption, 
largely used for meeting electricity requirement in remote areas using 
its own dedicated distribution system.
11.  
“Distribution”  means  the  conveyance  of  electricity  through  a 
distribution  network  system  at  voltages  below  66  kilovolt  or  as  is 
deemed by the Authority to be a part of the distribution network.
  32
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
12.  
“Distribution system” means a network, together with the connection 
assets  associated  with  the  network,  which  is  connected  to  another 
transmission or distribution system.
13.  
“Domestic off-take projects” means the projects wherein the power 
generated is consumed within the Country.
14.  
“Detailed  Project  Report  (DPR)”  is  further  step  in  firming  up  a 
developer‟s bid for the techno-economic costs as well as the various 
other  project  facilities.  The  DPR  shall  include,  inter  alia,  details  of 
location,  site  description,  plant  design/layout,  integration  with  grid 
(for  grid-interactive  plant),  local  distribution  network  layout  (for 
DDG), annual output of the plant/scheme, estimates of cost, phasing 
of expenditure, cost of generation and tariff (for grid-interactive and 
DDG  plants),  implementation  of  work,  bill  of  material,  construction 
schedule etc.
15.  
“Detailed  Project  Proposal  (DPP)”  shall  be  applicable  to  stand-
alone projects under this Policy. The DPP shall include, inter alia, the 
following: site description, annual output of the project, estimates of 
cost, phasing of expenditure, cost of implementation of the project, 
implementation  of  work,  bill  of  material,  installation  schedule, 
arrangement for after-sales services, availability of spare parts etc.
16.  
“Developer” means a person or body of persons, company, firm and 
such  other  private  or  government  undertaking,  who/that  finances, 
designs, processes, constructs, commissions, operates and maintains 
the project facilities and, at the end of the concession term, transfers 
them to the Government where applicable.
17.  
“Feed-in-tariff”  means  a  minimum  guaranteed  price  per  unit  of 
electricity paid to the generator.
18.  
“Government” means the Royal Government of Bhutan.
  33
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
19.  
“Green Energy based technology substitution” refers to the greener 
technologies  that  replace  the  existing  polluting  technologies  or 
sources of energy and includes bio fuel, electric/hybrid vehicles, and 
future  substitution  technologies  as  recognized  or  approved  by  the 
Nodal Agency.
20.  
“Grid-Connected RE projects” means the projects connected to 11 kV 
and above grid network of the utilities to sell electricity to the grid.
21.  
“Hybrid  system”  refers  to  the  solution  of  combining  two  or  more 
RE technologies with the aim to decrease the intermittent nature of 
generation of such technologies.
22.  
“Local” means a person who is a citizen of Bhutan or an entity, which 
is incorporated/registered within Bhutan.
23.  
“Nodal  Agency”  means  the  agency  responsible  for  promotion  and 
development of renewable energy in the Country.
24.  
“Pre-Feasibility Report (PFR)” is the report that delineates the project 
location specifics, generation potential, access and power evacuation 
arrangement  (in  case  of  grid-interactive  plants),  and  details  of  site 
investigation programmes.
25.  
“Principal  Developer”  is  the  “Developer”  identified  as  the  “Principal 
Developer”  in  the  application  for  pre-qualification  and  holding  at 
least fifty one percent (51%) of the Developer‟s share of the equity in 
the investment.
26.  
“Project  Development  Agreement  (PDA)”  means  a  legal  document 
expressing a convergence of will between the parties, outlining the 
terms and details of the agreement between the Government and the 
Project Company till signing of the Concession Agreement/Allocation 
Agreement, including each party‟s requirements and responsibilities. 
  34
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
The PDA serves as a basis for a future formal contract in the form of 
the Concession Agreement (CA)/Allocation Agreement (AA), and lays 
out  the  time  periods  in  which  crucial  milestones  must  be  reached 
prior to further progression with the deal.
27.  
“Promoter”  means  the  person  who  undertakes  stand-alone  RE 
projects.
28.  
“Private  participant”  means  any  person  from  the  private  sector  in 
energy  business  either  for  bulk  supply  or  retail  sale  under  certain 
conditions.
29.  
“Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs)” means different renewable 
energy technologies like solar, wind, biomass, small hydro etc.
30.  
“Renewable  Energy  Development  Fund  (REDF)”  means  a  Fund 
proposed  under  the  Bhutan  Sustainable  Hydropower  Development 
Policy, 2008 and established under this Policy. The Fund will be created 
allocating a part of the up-front premium received from larger hydro 
developers and other sources prescribed under this Policy.
31.  
“Renewable  Energy  Obligation  (REO)”  is  an  obligation  on  licensed 
suppliers to supply a specified proportion of their electricity supplies 
to their customers from renewable sources of energy. 
32.  
“Renewable Purchase Obligation (RPO)” is the minimum amount of 
energy required to be purchased by the obligated entities (companies) 
in order to meet their mandatory requirement.
33.  
“Renewable energy sources” means renewable sources such as small 
hydro,  wind,  solar  including  its  integration  with  combined  cycle, 
biomass, bio-fuel cogeneration, urban or municipal waste and such 
other sources as recognized or approved by the Nodal Agency.
  35
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
34.  
“Request  for  Proposal  (RfP)”  means  the  document  an  organisation 
posts  to  elicit  proposals  from  potential  developers  of  a  project. 
Ideally, RfPs stipulate the requesting organization’s requirements and 
delineates the deliverables associated with the project and establishes 
a framework for project execution so as to minimize the possibility of 
misunderstandings and errors.
35.  
“Royalty Energy” means the free Energy that would be made available 
to  the  Government  under  a  project  during  the  concession  period 
i.e.  the  period  starting  from  the  commercial  operation  date  of  the 
project.
36.  
“Sale” means the sale of electricity to a customer or for resale to third 
parties.
37.  
“Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)” means a body corporate created to 
fulfil  narrow,  specific  or  temporary  objectives,  primarily  to  isolate 
financial risk.
38.  
“Stand-alone  renewable  energy  systems”  means  the  systems 
installed  at  an  individual‟s  household,  community,  institutions,  and 
commercial  entities  for  self-consumption.  These  systems  do  not 
have  their  dedicated  distribution  network unlike  DDG,  nor are  they 
connected  to  grid,  except  for  rooftop-based  Solar  PV  systems  or 
other technologies developed under net-metering arrangement.
39.  
“Transmission” means an activity pertaining to a transmission system 
including the conveyance of electricity at voltages of 66 kilovolt and 
above or as is deemed by the Authority to be a part of the transmission 
network.
  36
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
40.  
“Waste  to  Energy  (WTE)”  means  energy  generated  out  of  waste 
that includes municipal solid waste or any other form of organic or 
inorganic wastes.
41.   Hydropower projects under this Policy are classified as follows:
Category
Capacity (kW)
Pico
1 to 10
Micro
Above 10 to 100
Mini
Above 100 to 1000
Small
Above 1000 to 25000
  37
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY  2013
  2
AlternAtive renewAble energy Policy  2013
