Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission  
Resolution #20 
September 18, 2008 
Electricity (Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules 
 
 
Article 1 
General Provisions 
 
1.  Electricity (Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules (hereinafter the Rules) regulates 
the  relationships,    between  the  Distribution  licensee,  low-capacity  power  plant,  on 
the one hand, and consumer, on the other, in the process of electricity purchase, sale, 
distribution, pass through and/or consumption. 
2.  The  terms  introduced  by  these  Rules  are  obligatory  for  all  persons,  who  carry  out 
electricity  generation,  distribution,  pass  through  and/or  consumption.  Imposing 
obligations inconsistent with these Rules is prohibited. 
3.  The  terms  in  these  Rules  have  the  same  meaning  as  in  the  law  of  Georgia  on 
“Electricity and Natural Gas”. 
4.  Besides  the  cases  introduced  in  these  Rules,  termination  of  electricity  supply  for 
consumers  without  preliminary  permission  of  the  Georgian  National  Energy  and 
Water Supply Regulatory Commission (hereinafter the Commission) is prohibited. 
5.  Any  person,  if  his/her  rights  are  violated,  has  the  right  to  appeal  to  the  Public 
defender of consumers interests existing within the Commission, or to appeal  to the 
court. In addition, he/she has right to demand compensation from the violator for the 
damage which occurred due  to  the violation of guaranteed rights  under these  Rules 
and/or failure to meet its obligations. 
 
Article 2 
Main Principles 
 
1.  Electricity  Distribution 
licensee 
is  obliged  to  provide  consumer  with  safe, 
uninterruptable  and  reliable  electricity  supply  within  relevant  parameters,  in 
accordance with the obligations under the legislation, license terms, these Rules and 
corresponding agreement.  
2.  Distribution licensee is obliged to: 
a.  provide service to all types of the consumer in accordance with these Rules; 
b.  follow established technical and safety standards and rules; 
c.  provide constant service for the consumers – among them, permanent  24 hour 
telephone hot-line service; 
d.  carry  out  immediate  response  to  the  notification  about  termination  of 
electricity supply or/and to the voltage deviation from the established norms; 
1 
 
e.  sell  electricity  to  the  retail  consumer  (according  to  the  terms  established  in 
these Rules); 
f.  pass  through  electricity  belonged  to  another  person  via  distribution  network 
upon request till the electricity network of preliminary identified person; 
g.  ensure the proper implementation of obligations under the terms of the license 
and these Rules. 
3.  Distribution licensee is obliged to react immediately and stop the electricity supply, if: 
a.  life, health or property of an individual is under the threat; 
b.  technical  standards  and  safety  rules  are  violated.  In  addition,  based  on  the 
complexity of the violation,  the consumer will be given a reasonable period to 
remedy the violation; 
c.  Dispatch  Licensee  has  granted  the  appropriate  instruction  to  restrict  or 
terminate the electricity supply. 
4.  Distribution Licensee is authorized to stop electricity supply, according to the current 
legislation and these Rules, if: 
a.  the consumer has not paid the electricity bills;  
b.  the  consumer  violates  the  requirements  of  the  technical  conditions  for  the 
connection to the distribution network; 
c.  the consumer does not fulfill those conditions laid down in the Rules and / or 
contractual  obligations  which  are  envisaged  for  termination  of  electricity 
supply under current legislation; 
d.  there is a need for planned and emergency maintenance works. 
5.  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  conduct  monetary  payment  with  consumer  only 
after  full  reflection  of  the  payment  amount  and  last  date  of  payment  in  the  bill 
defined in these Rules. 
 
Article 3 
Service sector and the general conditions 
1.  Under Power Purchase Agreement the seller makes commitment to supply electricity 
according to the current legislation, these Rules and contractual obligations; and the 
buyer makes commitment to pay the cost for the received electricity and to follow the 
terms defined in current legislation, in these Rules and in the agreement. 
2.  These  Rules  and  corresponding  agreement  are  the  main  legal  documents  for 
electricity  consumer, which regulates  rights and  responsibilities  for the  Distribution 
licensee,  the  low-capacity  power  plant  and  consumer  while  electricity  purchasing, 
selling, distributing, passing through and/or consuming.  
3.  The terms described in this methodology are the integral parts of the Power Purchase 
and Service Agreement.  
4.  Power  Purchase  Agreement,  as  well  as,  Service  Agreement  between  Distribution 
Licensee and consumer can be executed in written form (as well as, with bill or other 
written document, according with the forms approved by these Rules). 
2 
 
5.  The terms of Power Purchase Agreement, in case of execution this kind of agreement 
with consumer, shall be in accordance with requirements of these Rules and current 
legislation.  
6.  Distribution licensee has no  right to  make  an agreement  and/or other deal with the 
consumer,  content  or/and  terms  of  which  contradict  with  these  Rules  and  current 
legislation. 
7.  Distribution  licensee  and  low-capacity  power  plant  must  give  a  justified  written 
answer  to  the  consumers’  application  no  later  than  ten  day  after  receiving  the 
application. 
71. Declarant should be replied in the same written or electronic form as the application 
was received (if declarant has not requested to answer in another form) 
8.  Distribution licensee is obliged to develop  application templates on various inquiries 
and make them accessible to consumers in compliance with these Rules (According to 
the repeatedly received applications from the consumers). 
9.  Electricity  retail  consumers  are  divided  into  two  groups  for  the  purposes  of  these 
Rules,   
a.  household  consumer  -natural  person  which  buys  and  consumes  electricity 
only for household purposes; 
b.  non-household  consumer–  all  other  retail  consumers,  but  household 
consumers. 
 
Article 4 
The basis and prerequisite for service 
 
1.  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  register  as  a  subscriber  that  person,  who  uses  (or 
will use) their service in accordance with these Rules.  
2.  Consumer of electricity is obliged to use electricity only for the purposes indicated in 
application.  
3.  A person who wants to receive and consume electricity must submit an application to 
a corresponding distribution licensee for the purpose of registering as subscriber. 
4.  In case of changing the owner of a residential apartment, an utility or other object,  a 
new  owner  is  obliged  to  present,  alongside  with  property-related  documentation, 
application envisaged by this article to the corresponding distribution licensee. 
5.  If  a  person  temporary  uses  the  real  property  and  owner  of  the  property  gives  him 
written  permission,  the  person  has  a  right  to  be  registered  as  subscriber,  and  the 
Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  register  him  as  subscriber  on  the  given  address. 
Furthermore, Distribution licensee is authorized to request contribution of money on 
its  deposit  in  accordance  with  the  conditions  of  these  Rules  and  covering  the  full 
accrued  debt  (Licensee  can  request  full  recovery  of  the  debt  if  registration  of  the 
temporary  owner  causes  the  cancellation  of  the  registration  of  the  subscriber  with 
accrued debts, and in case if the non-payment of the indebtedness or disagreement on 
3 
 
the  conditions  for  debt  covering  the  Distribution  Licensee  has  right  to  decline 
registration of a subscriber on the given address).  
6.  Applicant  expresses  his  will  to  receive  and  consume  electricity  under  existing 
legislation  and  conditions  given  in  these  Rules  by  submitting  application  for 
registering  as  a  subscriber  and,  on  the  other  part,  Distribution  license  expresses 
consent and undertakes obligation to supply applicant with electricity under current 
legislation and conditions given in these Rules by registering applicant as a subscriber. 
Both  the  Distribution  licensee  and  the  applicant  (subscriber)  has  right  to  demand 
from  another  party  the  written  confirmation  of  the  deal,  at  any  stage  of  legal 
relations.  
7.  Under the given Article, applicant for registration as a subscriber cannot be required 
to  pay  any  type  of  fee  for  implementation  of  procedures  and  activities  needed  for 
electricity supply, unless other condition is envisaged directly in these Rules.  
8.  Application should indicate:  
a) name and address of the applicant;  
b) name of the Distribution licensee;  
c) consent of natural person responsible for payment, his name and surname, 
address,  identification  number  by  the  identity  card  (other  identification  document 
admitted by Georgian legislation is acceptable) or in case of legal person  – his name, 
or in case of other person – his name, legal address, bank details, identification code of 
taxation body and date;  
d) place (address) where electricity supply and service should be provided;  
e) type of ownership of real property, where the service should be provided;  
f) purpose of electricity consumption (household or non-household);  
g) If consumer wishes:  
g.a) execution of the Power Purchase Agreement;  
g.b) presence on the drawing up of an act for the starting of electricity supply 
of new subscriber; 
h) Other similar requirements, considered necessary by the applicant.  
9.   The following documents should be attached to the Application additionally:  
a) Real estate ownership certificate. In case of temporary ownership of the real 
property - written consent of the real property’s owner; 
b) Written consent of natural person responsible for payment, if applicant and 
responsible for payment are different persons.  
10. After  receiving  application  for  registering  as  subscriber  the  Distribution  licensee  is 
obliged to register consumer as a subscriber within no more than five working days 
and ensure his electricity supply in accordance with the conditions described in these 
Rules. 
11. Right  after  of  the  implementation  of  necessary  procedures  and  activities  for 
registering  of  applicant as  a  subscriber  and  before  starting  up  electricity  supply,  the 
Act for the starting electricity supply of new subscriber should be drawn up; it should 
4 
 
include type and number of electricity meter, initial reading, and number of stamps 
and  period  of  planned  inspection  of  electricity  meter.  The  consumer  has  a  right  to 
request  the  presence  at  the  drawing  up  the  act.  In  this  case  licensee  is  obliged  to 
notify the date of the drawing up the act.  
12. After  registration  as  a  subscriber  the  Distribution  Licensee  is  obliged  to  ensure 
execution of the Power Purchase Agreement with consumer (if the consumer wishes 
so).  While  execution  of  the  agreement  the  Distribution  Licensee  and/or  consumer 
have  right  to  use  approved  standard  template  of  the  “Power  Purchase  Agreement” 
(see  Annex  #1).  In  addition,  while  the  selection  of  the  agreement  template  the 
consumer  has  right  to  request  the  signature  of the  standard  template  of  the  “Power 
Purchase Agreement”.  
13.  After  the  registration,  the  execution  of  the  Power  Purchase  Agreement(if  the 
consumer wishes so) and the drawing up the Act for the starting of electricity supply 
of  new  subscriber  the  Distribution  Licensee  is  obliged  immediately  to  provide 
electricity supply, if Application for the registration as a subscriber does not envisage 
another date. 
 
Article 5 
Rendering of service 
1.  Customer is not required to accept any condition or/and service, which is not defined 
directly under these Rules and existing legislation.  
2.  Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  inspect  non-household  consumers’  electric 
installations and their compliance with technical and safety norms. 
3.  Distribution licensee is not obliged to inform consumer in advance about the date of 
possible  inspection.  Customer  is  obliged  to  give  permission  to  the  representative  of 
Distribution  Licensee  to  the  electric  installations  in  his  ownership.  Moreover,  the 
consumer  should  be  able  to  identify  inspector  by  corresponding  documentation, 
uniform and other means known to the consumer beforehand.  
4.  Only  distribution  licensee  carries  out  the  restoration  of  electricity  supply  to  the 
consumer, after proper inspection of electricity meter and connection to network. 
5.  Upon  consumer’s  request  it  is  possible  to  provide  him  with  backup  power  supply 
(abovementioned  requires  execution  of  the  relevant  Agreement).  Distribution 
Licensee is able to require one-time compensation of costs from the consumer for the 
backup  power  supply  in  accordance  with  the preliminary  executed  agreement  (This 
requirement  is  also  applicable  to  provide  the  consumers’  closets,  garages,  elevators, 
lightening and other destination facilities or/and utilities with electricity that due to 
request of the consumer (or consumers) should be carried out separately). 
6.  Distribution licensee should grant to the concerned party (as well as, retail consumer) 
with  opportunity  to  use  temporarily  those  electrical  installations  (electricity 
receivers),  which  are  used  for  household,  construction  and  other  purposes.  
5 
 
Abovementioned requires  preliminary agreement with Distribution licensee. In case 
under this  Paragraph relations are carried out as follows: 
a.  Temporary  connection  to  the  distribution  network  and,  if  necessary, 
organization  of  metering  point  are  not  obligations  of  Distribution  licensee. 
Abovementioned  should  be  carried  out  by  the  concerned  party  after 
preliminary agreement with the Distribution licensee; 
b.  Parties  can  agree  upon  the  connection  of  electrical  installation  (electricity 
receivers) to a network, its utilization and accrual method, without individual 
metering.  Provided  that  charge  of  consumed  electricity  by  mutually  agreed 
method  (without  individual  metering),  is  a  one-time  operation  and  shall  not 
exceed 3 calendar months; 
c.  When it is impossible to determine full amount of consumed electricity with 
the  use  of  electrical  installation(s)  and  agreement  between  them  does  not 
envisage  any  other  condition,  calculation  must  be  carried  out  on  the  basis  of 
multiplication of utility’s installed capacity, its utilization rate 0.5 and 8 hour 
operation during a day. Calculation by this method is a one-time operation and 
shall not exceed 3 calendar months. 
7.  In the case envisaged in  Paragraph 6 of this Article, Distribution licensee is obliged to 
state a justified refusal to supply the consumer with electricity, if it is evident that use 
of  electrical  installations  (electricity  receivers)  will  effect  unfavorably  on  power-
supply system or/and distribution licensee capability to render service on a  standard 
level to him or/and other consumers.    
 
Article 6 
Organization of metering point 
1.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  record  consumed  electricity  individually 
(except for the case  directly  envisaged in these Rules), for this purpose organize  the 
metering  point,  accordingly,  purchase,  install  and  repair  the  meter  necessary  for 
installing  the  metering point, if  required,  different  equipment,  electrical  installation 
and  other  facilities  that  provide  proper  functioning  of  the  metering  system  and 
protect against illegal (unauthorized) interference. 
11.  If installed capacity of electrical installation of non-household consumers connected 
to one point of distribution network is less than 1 kW, the parties are authorized to 
agree on electricity consumption without meters. The amount of consumed electricity 
in such case is determined according to installed capacity of electrical installation and 
operating hours. 
2.   If required, the distribution licensee has the right, and according to the requirement 
envisaged  in  the  Rules  is  obliged  to  remove,  repair,  check  and  change  the  metering 
point (including electricity meter) and also his own other devices, including electrical 
installations.  
6 
 
3.   The Distribution licensee is authorized to charge the consumer with metering point 
organization  cost  (including  the  costs  of  purchasing  and  installing  meters  or  other 
devices) only in cases directly defined in the current legislation and these Rules. 
4.   Electricity meter, accordingly, other electrical installations of metering point shall be 
protected  against  illegal  (unauthorized)  interference  not  to  change  or  encroach 
electricity meter readings. 
5.   Metering point shall comply with the current technical regulations and standards in 
Georgia. Metering point shall be organized so that the interested party will be able to 
take  meter  reading,  and  also  distribution  licensee  freely  carries  out  other  activities 
under these Rules.   
6.  Before the Distribution licensee starts work to provide consumers with electricity, the 
consumer  is  obliged  to  inform  him  about  the  obstacles  or/and  other  negative 
circumstance in the workplace known to him. 
7.  Electricity  meter  shall  be  installed  (accordingly,  metering  point  shall  be  organized) 
near the territory that belongs to the consumer (outside the territory), but not more 
than50meters  away  from  the  apartment,  enterprise  or  other  object  where  the 
electricity  is  consumed,  if  any  other  provision  is  not  considered  under  technical 
regulation or the agreement between distribution licensee and the consumer.  
8.  If it is necessary, electricity meter shall be installed on the territory belonging to the 
consumer, in such case the consumer shall provide the place for installing    metering 
point wiring so that the representative of Distribution licensee will be able to install 
metering point and wiring, test, repair and take meter reading on regular basis.  
9.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  responsible  for  organizing  metering  point  (including 
installing  electricity  meter),  putting  stamp  in  a  proper  technical  way  drawing  up 
relevant  act,  where  the  name  and  surname  of  the  representative  of  Distribution 
licensee, consumer, person responsible for keeping metering point and the meter will 
be indicated. In addition: 
a)  Distribution licensee provides restoration, change and installation of the damaged 
metering  point,  its  component  meters,  other  electrical  installations  and  facilities  on 
his own costs. 
b) In case the metering point installed  in the entrance of the  residential building is 
damaged,  the  Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  request  the  reimbursement  of 
damage from the consumer in case if the damage of metering point is proved to be the 
consumer’s fault; 
c)  The  consumer  is  responsible  for  keeping  metering  point  and  also  its  component 
meters, electrical installations when the metering point is installed on the protected 
area that belongs to the consumer (This subparagraph does not apply to the cases of 
damaging  the metering point installed  in the entrance of the residential building). 
10.  In  case  of  two-way  flow  of  electricity  between  consumer  and  Distribution  licensee 
networks,  reversible  electricity  meter  shall  be  installed  (accordingly  metering  point 
shall be organized so that electricity overflow is metered in both directions). 
7 
 
11.  If  the  consumer  is  supplied  with  electricity  from  the  distribution  licensee  via  the 
transformer belonging to the consumer, electricity meter shall be installed (metering 
point shall be organized) on the side of high voltage.   
12. If    0,220  kV  voltage  household  consumer  owns      0,380  kV  voltage  electrical 
installation that was connected to the distribution network and the consumer’s total 
capacity  to  be  connected  is  not  more  than10  kW,  the  consumer  is  authorized  to 
request organization of 0,380 kV voltage metering point  instead of  220 kV voltage 
metering point according to one of these rules: 
a) The consumer shall apply to the Distribution licensee and provide organization of 
0,380 kV metering point on its own. In this case, the Distribution licensee is obliged 
to issue technical condition free of charge within two weeks of receipt of application; 
b) If the distribution licensee organizes the 0,380 kV metering point, the distribution 
licensee  is  obliged  to  provide  the  change  of  metering  point,  and  the  consumer  –  to 
reimburse the cost incurred on change and organization of metering point that shall 
not exceed 250 GEL including VAT.  
 
Article 7 
Electricity Distribution Licensee Obligations and Expansion of Electricity 
Distribution Network 
1.   Electricity frequency, voltage and other parameter in the distribution network shall 
comply  with  norms  and  state  standards  in  the  electricity  sector.  While  providing 
electricity supply Distribution licensee is responsible for those electricity parameters 
that can be corrected or changed by him. 
2.   According  to  these  Rules  the  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  own  electricity 
distribution  network  and  its  component  electricity  installations,  including  metering 
devices (meters) and other electricity installations and is obliged to supply consumers 
with electricity.   
3.  Expansion,  reconstruction,  repair  of  distribution  network  of  distribution  licensee, 
installation  and  connection  of  electrical  installations,  decommissioning  or  switching 
shall be carried out only by the distribution licensee. 
4.   In  case  the  consumer  paid  to  the  Distribution licensee for  purchasing  the  meter,  as 
well  as  for  rehabilitation,  reconstruction,  arrangement  of  electricity  distribution 
network,  or/and  expansion  of  distribution  network,  the  consumer  is  authorized  to 
request  pay  back  or  offset  the  paid  amount.  (This  paragraph  does  not  apply  if 
consumer has paid according to the requirements directly defined in these Rules and 
current legislation).  
Article 8 
Illegal consumption of electricity and preventing methods 
1.  Illegal  consumption  of  electricity  means  unauthorized  connection  to  distribution 
network, deliberate damage of electricity meter stamps (if the accuracy of metering is 
violated), falsification of digital data of electricity meter, electricity theft; in addition 
8 
 
it includes electricity consumption with avoidance of electricity meter and/or without 
the meter (except for the cases envisaged by these Rules and legislation.) 
2.  In case of illegal consumption of electricity, Distribution licensee under these Rules is 
obliged to terminate electricity supply to relevant consumer. In this case, termination 
of electricity supply is possible without preliminary notification of consumer (except 
for the cases, when it is known that termination of electricity supply to this consumer 
increased  expenses 
will  cause  deterioration  of  person’s 
disproportionately with the respect to the amount to be charged or already charged).  
3.  As  soon  as  illegal  consumption  of  electricity  is  revealed,  Distribution  licensee  is 
life  or  health,  or 
obliged to draw up corresponding act.  
4.  in  case  of  unauthorized  connection  of  electrical  installations  to  the  network, 
deliberate damage of electricity meter stamps (if the accuracy of metering is violated), 
falsification of digital data of electricity meter, electricity theft, including electricity 
consumption with avoidance of electricity meter or/and unauthorized consumption of 
electricity  without  the  meter  the  consumer  of  electricity  is  obliged  to  pay  a  cost  of 
consumed  electricity  during  its  illegal  consumption.  The  amount  of  illegally 
consumed  electricity  will  be  defined  on  the  basis  of  corresponding  act,  under  the 
following rule:  
a)  When  it  is  possible  to  define  total  amount  of  illegally  consumed  electricity, 
Distribution licensee will accordingly correct the data.  
b) When it is possible to define the amount of illegal consumed electricity or errors of 
meter  reading  within  a  calendar  day,  but  initial  date  of  illegal  consumption  of 
electricity  is  unknown,  representative  of  Distribution  licensee  calculates  the  total 
amount of consumed electricity from the date of last inspection (but not longer than 3 
months) of electricity meter (metering point).  
c) When it is impossible to define the amount of illegally consumed electricity within 
a calendar day, but an initial date of illegal consumption of electricity is known, the 
amount  of  consumed  electricity  within  violation  period  is  calculated  through 
multiplying  the  capacity  of  consumption  from  the  network  by  the  consumer  at  the 
moment of inspection by 8 hour consumption within a calendar day. Moreover, when 
it  is  impossible  to  measure  capacity  of  consumption  or  measured  capacity  is 
considerably  low  than  installed  capacity  of  electrical  installations  of  the  given 
consumer,  the  amount  of  consumed  electricity  within  violation  period  is  calculated 
according to the potential capacity of consumer’s receivers and time table of capacity 
usage  in  accordance  with  Annex  3  to  these  Rules  (according  to  the  this  paragraph 
charging period shall not exceed 3 months). 
d)  When  it  is  impossible  to  define  an  initial  date  of  illegally  consumption  of 
electricity and the amount of illegally consumed electricity within a calendar day, the 
amount  of  consumed  electricity  is  calculated  within  one  month  period  through 
multiplying of consumed power from the network at the moment of inspection by 8 
hour consumption within a calendar day. Moreover, when it is impossible to measure 
9 
 
capacity  of  consumption  or  measured  capacity  is  considerably  low  than  installed 
capacity  of  electrical  installations  of  the  given  consumer,  the  amount  of  consumed 
electricity within violation period is calculated according to the potential capacity of 
consumer’s receivers and time table of capacity usage in accordance with Annex 3 to 
these Rules.  
e)  if  consumer  does  not  permit  the  representative  of  Distribution  licensee  to  define 
installed  capacity  with  ungrounded  (unjustified)  reasons  and  prevents  him  to 
undertake his work, Distribution licensee has right, after 2 working days from written 
notice  to  the  consumer,  to  charge  the  multiplication  (nominal  capacity)  of  voltage, 
current  and  capacity  factors  on incoming  wiring  during  the  allowed maximum  load 
through calculating 15 day usage.  
5.  If after using charging method envisaged by subparagraph  “e” of Paragraph 4 of this 
Article, the consumer submits in writing justified argumentation to the Distribution 
licensee about the non-admission of the representative of Distribution licensee within 
a  reasonable  time-frame  (no  more  than  3  months  after  receiving  of  the  Billing  Act, 
then  illegal  consumed  electricity  shall  be  calculated  according  to  the  installed 
installations  within  a  calendar  day  under 
capacity  of  consumer’s  electrical 
subparagraph “d” of Paragraph 4 of this Article.  
6.  While  calculating  the  total  sum  of  installed  capacity  of  consumer’s  electrical 
installations  given  in  this  Article  only  those  electrical  devices  in  his  ownership  are 
used  which  are  connected  or  ready  to  be  connected  to  the  network  and  are  in 
operating condition.  
7.  The  consumer  who  illegally  used  service  of  Distribution  licensee,  in  addition  to 
imposed  with 
compensation  of  damage,  under  existing 
Administrative penalty, envisaged by Georgian code of Administrative Offenses.  
8.  In  case  illegal  consumption  was  attested,  Distribution  licensee  has  a  right  to  charge 
legislation  may  be 
customer with cost of insured letter send to him under these Rules. 
9.  The Distribution licensee is authorized not to deliver service to the person who used 
this service illegally and as a result is charged with debt until the debt is fully covered 
or redistribution of the debt is agreed. 
 
Article 9 
Calculation and Payment of the Electricity Cost 
 
1.  The  cost  of  consumed  electricity  by  the  consumer  is  calculated  on  the  basis  of  the 
individual electricity meter reading. 
2.  Billing and payment of consumed electricity shall be carried out on monthly basis (in 
accordance with consumed electricity by the retail consumer).  
3.  The cost of consumed electricity by a retail customer shall be paid within time-frame 
indicated in the bill which must be not less than 15 days. If the last day of time-frame 
10 
 
coincides  with  a  day  off  or  holiday  and  payment  offices  do  not  work,  the  next 
working day would be considered as a day of time-frame expiration.  
4.  The bill must include the last day of the payment, consumption tariff, the amount of 
the  consumed  electricity  (kWh)  and  its  cost,  the  place  where  payment  is  available 
without additional charges, as well as the phone number of the hotline service of the 
Distribution  licensee;  On  the  other  side  of  the  bill  must  be  indicated  information 
determined by the decision of the Commission.  
5.  After expiration of time-frame of payment indicated in the bill if the cost is not paid 
the  Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  terminate  electricity  supply  to  the 
consumer.  In  addition,  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  consider  a  period  of  the 
payment  of  the  debt  and  its  reflection  (not  more  than  3working  days).  In  case  of 
violation of these procedures termination of the electricity supply will be postponed. 
51.  The bill shall be delivered to retail consumer every month at one and the same time as 
far as possible. Non-receipt of a bill does not exempt the consumer from payment of 
consumed electricity.  
6.  (Repealed19.07.2012, №9).  
7.  The redistribution of the accrued debt may occur upon the agreement of the parties 
which should be signed with the corresponding agreement.   
8.  Due to non-payment of the indebtedness the termination of the electricity supply is 
not allowed during evening hours, in a day off or holidays and the day before them.  
9.  The consumer must pay the charged cost by cash in the corresponding service center 
or by transfer payment on the bank account.  
10. Charged cost for the consumer must be fully indicated in the bill.  
11. The  consumer  has  right,  in  agreement  with  Distribution  licensee,  to  prepay  cost  of 
electricity. Prepaid amount will be taken into account during next payment. In case of 
deficit, it must be reimbursed to Distribution licensee.  
12. It is prohibited for the Distribution licensee to shift indebtedness from one consumer 
to another, without written consent of the latter. 
 
Article 10 
Mechanisms of Accrual and Payment Ensuring 
 
1.  Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  demand  from  the  consumer  to  deposit  an 
amount of  money and in case of failure to pay on time the consumer shall ensure to 
deposit  required  amount  under  the  Rules  and  Procedures  for  the  withdrawal  of  the 
indebtedness  accrued  on  the  consumer;  In  addition,  the  Distribution  licensee  shall 
reflect the amount to be deposited in the consumer’s accrued debt if: 
a) a person has registered as a subscriber on the address of property in temporary use;  
b)  Consumer  delayed  to  pay  the  cost  of  consumed  electricity  three  and  more  times 
within a 12-month period;  
c) Service to the consumer was terminated due to illegal consumption of electricity.  
11 
 
2.  Deposit  shall  not  exceed  average  monthly  payment  of  consumed  electricity  by  a 
consumer (with consideration of seasonality) and in case of registration of subscriber 
on  the  address  of  property  in  temporary  use  –  more  than  amount  of  consumed 
electricity  in  the  first  calculating  period.  The  consumer  must  not  be  required  to 
deposit  an  amount  for  the  second  time  if  deposit  amount  was  not  intended  by 
distribution license-holder to cover indebtedness between them or was not returned 
back, in accordance to the requirements of these Rules.  
3.  Deposit amount must be returned to the consumer if:  
a)  The  consumer  voluntarily  denied  the  service  and  fully  covered  the  indebtedness 
during final payment;  
b)  During  a  12-month  period  the  consumer  fairly  executed  his  duties  and  charged 
payments  are  fully  and  timely  covered  (except  for  the  deposit  on  the  basis  of 
registration of subscriber on address of property in temporary use);  
4.  If  electricity  meter  was  installed  in  the  consumer’s  protected  area  (in  residential 
apartment, as well) and by reason of consumer it is impossible to read the meter, the 
Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  charge  consumer  with  one  month  payment, 
which is calculated based on quantity of average monthly consumption of electricity 
by the consumer (with consideration of seasonality). The difference between real and 
accrued  consumption  must  be  corrected  (re-calculated)  in  accordance  with  the  real 
reading of consumer’s electricity meter.  
5.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  responsible  for  the  results  caused  by  not  exercising  the 
rights  under  these  Rules.  If  the  Distribution  licensee  has  not  exercised  the  rights 
under these Rules and as a result the consumer has not covered his debt for the period 
of two months or more and agreement about the conditions of the debt payment does 
not exist, upon consumer’s request the abovementioned indebtedness shall be equally 
reallocated for two years at least if parties do not agree on other time-frame.  
51. If the dispute between the Distribution licensee and the consumer is reviewed in the 
Commission in such case the time-frame for debt redistribution is determined by the 
Commission.  
 
Article 11 
Inspection of Electricity Meter and Dispute Related to Metering 
1.  In order to resolve disputes fast between parties, at the request of one party a meeting 
between them shall be held without delay. Representative of the Distribution licensee 
is  obliged  to  draw-up  an  act  signed  by  the  parties  for  the  purpose  of  dispute 
resolution, agreement upon any issue or record of other fact.  
2.  If  consumer’s  electricity  meter  incorrectly  counts  electricity  consumption  or 
electricity  meter  reading  was  incorrectly  recorded  and  as  a  result  the  bill  was 
incorrectly issued the Distribution licensee is obliged to correct consumer’s data.  
3.  In  case  of  dispute  due  to  incorrect  reading  of  electricity  meter,  distribution licensee 
shall inspect electricity meter reading and draw up an act, at least in 5 working days. 
12 
 
31.  For  the  purposes  of  these  Rules  the  inspection  of  electricity  meter  implies  visual 
observation  of  the  measuring  facilities  (meters),  determination  of  actual  deviations 
with  different  methods  if  necessary,  its  confirmation,  expert  (official)  measuring 
or/and  other  activities  necessary  for  evaluation  of  abovementioned  measuring 
facilities.  
4.  The  consumer  shall  not  be  imposed  with  charge  for  electricity  meter  inspection,  if 
period  of  scheduled  inspection  or  time-frame  of  inspection  of  electricity  meter  is 
overdue.  
5.  Organization  of  metering  point  of  electricity  consumption  of  a  retail  consumer,  as 
well as, removal, confirmation or/and installation of electricity meter is provided by 
the Distribution licensee. Covering of the costs for delivered service may be imposed 
on retail consumer only in case directly envisaged under these Rules.  
6.  Confirmation of electricity meter is carried out under established rule of Georgian law 
on “Providing Unified Measurement”.  
7.  Upon  the  request  of  the  consumer  Distribution  licensee  can  undertake  unplanned 
inspection of accuracy of electricity meter. The Distribution licensee is obliged upon 
request  to  inform  other  parties  about  intended  inspection.  The  costs  for  the 
unplanned  inspection  of  electricity  meter  upon  consumer’s  request  are  paid  by  the 
consumer; except the cases envisaged in Paragraph 4 and Paragraph 8 of this Article, 
as  well  as  in  cases  when  other  condition  is  not  determined  by  these  Rules  or/and 
existing legislation. In case of removal of the electricity meter, Distribution licensee is 
obliged to draw up an act immediately. 
8.  The electricity meter can be inspected by the Georgian national agency on standards, 
technical  regulations  and  metrology  and/or  any  other  accredited  laboratory  in 
Georgia  upon  request  of  an  interested  party.  In  case  the  inaccuracy  of  electricity 
meter  does  not  correspond  with  permissible  deviation  given  in  passport  the  cost  for 
proper  organization  of  metering  point,  including  confirmation  of  electricity  meter 
and  installation  costs  are  played  by  the  Distribution  licensee  (except  the  cases  of 
illegal consumption of electricity envisaged by these Rules).  
81.  An  interested  party  (including  the  consumer)  is  able  to  request  on  the  basis  of  the 
written  application  the  expert  (official)  measurement  on  the  any  stage  of 
determination  the  accuracy  of  the  accounting.  In  this  case  before  any  necessary 
activity  for  execution  of  the  request  the  Distribution  Licensee  is  obliged  to  give 
written  explanation  to  the  consumer  about  the  procedures  required  to  conduct  the 
expert (official) measurement and  all possible expenses related  to  them, in the cases 
directly envisaged by Paragraph 7 of this Article. 
9.  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  provide  presence  of  the  consumer  or  his/her 
representative on inspection of electricity meter by notifying the place and exact time 
of  the  meter  inspection.  Distribution  licensee  shall  inform  the  consumer  about 
inspection, at least, prior 3 working days.  
13 
 
10. Disputes related to the recording of consumed electricity by a retail consumer will be 
solved under the following rule:  
a)  If  proved  that  inaccuracy  of  electricity  meter  (detrimental  for  the  consumer) 
exceeded to its permissible error given in passport, Distribution licensee is obliged to 
correct  meter  reading  correspondingly  to  the  determined  error,  from  a  date  of 
beginning  of  inaccurate  recording  of  electricity  meter  up  to  inspection  date.  The 
overpaid  amount  shall  be  returned  to  the  consumer  as  soon  as  error  is  corrected 
or/and offset shall be done while next payment (depending on consumer’s will).  
b)  If  proved  that  inaccuracy  of  electricity  meter  (beneficial  for  the  consumer) 
exceeded to its permissible error given in passport, Distribution licensee is obliged to 
correct  meter  reading  correspondingly  to  the  determined  error,  from  a  date  of 
beginning of inaccurate recording of electricity meter up to inspection date. The cost 
of over-supplied electricity by the Distribution licensee shall be paid by consumer.  
11. If  determination  of  the  initial  date  of  inaccurate  accounting  of  electricity  meter  is 
impossible,  re-calculation  shall  be  carried  out  according  to  the  period  between  the 
penultimate  meter  reading  and  requested  inspection.  This  period  of  time  must  not 
exceed 3 months.  
111.  Determination  of  the  electricity  meter  inaccuracy  and  accruing  according  to 
inaccuracy  rate  shall  be  carried  out  only  in  Georgian  national  agency  on  standards, 
technical  regulations  and  metrology  or/and  any  other  accredited  laboratory  in 
Georgia on the basis of this meter inspection.  
12. In case of damage of electricity meter the consumer is obliged to notify immediately 
Distribution  licensee  (in  writing  or  orally,  via  phone  call,  as  well).  Upon  receiving 
notification  Distribution  licensee    is  obliged  to  confirm  about  it  in  writing  and 
immediately  undertake  needed  activities  and  procedures  for  permanent  electricity 
supply of this consumer (under these Rules and conditions envisaged by legislation); 
In  the  case  envisaged  by  this  Article  the  conditions  for  an  illegal  consumption  of 
electricity cannot be applied.  
13. If  for  a  certain  period  of  time  recording  of  consumed  electricity  (with  electricity 
meter)  was  not  done  or/and  for  this  period  of  time  determination  of  consumed 
electricity  is  impossible  (in  case  of  damage  of  electricity  meter),  the  consumer  for 
unrecorded  consumption  of  electricity  will  be  charged  with  payment,  equal  to  an 
average  monthly  consumption  of  electricity  during  3  months  consumption,  after 
arrangement  of  accounting  (with  consideration  of  seasonality).  This  is  a  one-time 
charge method and shall not exceed three months.  
14. In  case  the  meter  is  removed  for  replacement  purposes  the  Distribution  licensee  is 
obliged  to  install  a  new  meter  immediately  (notwithstanding,  whether,  due  to 
different  occasions,  an  old  meter  (removed)  needs  laboratory  or/and  any  other 
inspection), or act in accordance to Paragraph 15 of the given Article.  
15. In  case  of  removing  or/and  revealing  damage  (defect)  of  electricity  meter,  when 
recording  of  consumed  electricity  is  not  done  with  electricity  meter  and  before 
14 
 
arranging  of  proper  accounting,  customer,  only  with  his  written  consent  the 
consumer  will  be  charged  with  payment  calculated  from  his  average  electricity 
consumption (with consideration of seasonality). It is a one-time charge and shall not 
exceed one calendar month. If replacement of individual electricity meter takes place 
within 3 calendar days, written consent of the consumer under this Paragraph is not 
necessary.  
16. If conditions of the given Article do not envisage other rule, these conditions and 
charge method do not apply to the cases of illegal consumption of electricity. 
 
Article12 
Dispute Resolution 
1.  It  is  not  permitted  to  terminate  electricity  supply  without  bringing  a  claim  and 
determining reasonable time for fulfilling it (in compliance with the  conditions and 
procedures  under  these  Rules).  If  electricity  supply  is  terminated  in  contempt  of 
procedures envisaged by these Rules, supply shall be restored immediately.  
2.  During  hearing  of  a  dispute  between  consumer  and  Distribution  licensee  by  the 
Commission  or  a  court  it  is  not  permitted  to  terminate  electricity  supply  to  a 
consumer without requirement  of Commission or court decision, except cases when 
metering point is in order and dispute concerns to disagreements on current payment. 
3.  Paragraph 2 of the given Article does not apply to a consumer, who was terminated 
with electricity supply under conditions of these Rules before initiating of dispute. In 
such  case,  electricity  supply  will  be  restored  under  mutual  agreement  between  the 
Distribution licensee and consumer or/and Commission order or court decision, upon 
customer’s intermediation.  
4.  It is not permitted to terminate electricity supply on the basis of Distribution licensee 
demand  to  cover  indebtedness,  if  limitation  period  is  expired  from  the  arisen  of 
demand  under  Civil  Code  of  Georgia  (except  for  the  case,  when  consumer 
acknowledged the debt, under Article 137 of Civil Code of Georgia). Correspondingly, 
it is not permitted to use electricity termination and other ensuring mechanisms for 
the  purpose  of  acknowledging  the  abovementioned  indebtedness.  In  such  case, 
Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  through  Commission  or  court,  to  claim  from  the 
consumer to cover the indebtedness and, provided the Commission’s assent or court 
decision – to terminate electricity supply before completion of dispute.  
5.  Circumstances  given  in  this  Article  do  not  exempt  the  consumer  from  the  current 
payments for consumed electricity. 
Article 13 
Data Collection on electricity supply and service 
1.  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  keep  unified  register  of  electricity  supply  and 
service,  on  the  basis  of  terms  under  these  Rules  and  corresponding  instructions 
adopted by the Commission.  
15 
 
2.  Unified  register  of  electricity  supply  and  service  reflects  information,  determined 
under  these  Rules  and  corresponding  instructions,  as  well  as,  information  about 
response  to  customers  via  written,  verbal,  electronic  or  phone  call  applications  and 
executed service.  
3.  In  the  Unified  register  of  electricity  supply  information  is  entered  by  Distribution 
licensee  through  appropriate  notes  in  corresponding  register  (journal).  Distribution 
licensee  is  obliged  to  keep  relevant  register  (journal)  in  operational  control  centers, 
stations and substations owned by him, as well as, in the service-centers. Distribution 
licensee  is  obliged  to  keep  registers  (journal)  in  electronic  form,  (in  addition  the 
instruction adopted by the Commission can envisage obligation to keep different type 
of information or/and register (journal) in electronic form).  
4.  Registers  (journals) (except  in  electronic  form)  shall  be  properly  bound  and  attested 
by the Distribution licensee. 
5.  Distribution licensee is obliged to give identification number to the entry in register 
(journal),  whereby  it  will  be  possible  to  determine  serial  number  of  the  relevant 
register (journal) and entry in the journal and to identify the facts.  
6.  In  the  register  (journal)  where  the  data  about  supply  consumers  with  electricity  or 
service is reflected the following information is entered:  
a)  termination  of  electricity  supply  or/and  deviation  from  allowable  standard  of 
voltage (with indication of particular distribution network or section);  
b)  Initial  date  of  termination  of  electricity  supply  or/and  deviation  from  allowable 
standard of voltage;  
c)  date  of  restoration  of  normal  supplying  with  electricity  (with  indication  of 
particular distribution network or section);  
d)  termination  of  electricity  supply  without  notification  (non-planned)  and  planned 
termination;  
e) technical information of electricity supply, in case of deviation (unsteadiness) from 
allowable standard of voltage, particularly, deviation of established range of voltage in 
control points.;  
f) cause and circumstance that provoke termination of electricity supply or deviation 
(unsteadiness) from allowable standard of voltage.  
7.  The base for entry in relative register (journal) about termination of electricity supply 
or/and  deviation  (unsteadiness)  from  allowable  standard  of  voltage  is  indicators  of 
corresponding  automatic  instrument,  as  well  as,  response  of  electric  facilities  or/and 
verbal notification from different persons (among them, notification by phone call).  
8.  While  defining  period  of  time  of  termination  of  electricity  supply  or/and  deviation 
(unsteadiness) from allowable standard of voltage, time keeping begins from notifying 
the indicators of corresponding automatic instrument, as well as, response of electric 
facilities or/and verbally  from different persons (among them, notification by  phone 
call). 
16 
 
9.  The  basis  for  information  entering  in  register  (journal)  is  written,  phone  or  verbal 
notification from the consumer. Distribution licensee is obliged to give identification 
number to consumer’s notification that makes it possible to define sequence of entry 
in  register  (journal).  Identification  number  of  a  statement  shall  be  notified  to  an 
applicant as soon as notification is received.  
10. Distribution 
licensee 
shall  divide  consumer’s 
statements  by  categories 
in 
correspondence with issues in it.  
11. In  register  (journal),  where  consumer’s  (or  group  of  consumers)  statements  are 
registered shall be indicated (entered) the following information:  
a) Name and address of the applicant;  
b) Registration number of statement;  
c) Short description of the statement (in accordance with given category);  
d) Date of response;  
e) Type of response;  
f) If responded by letter, date and number of the letter;  
g) Result – whether statement (application) was solved.  
12. Facts, entered in registers (journals), within two weeks after the end of every calendar 
month, must be reflected in unified register of electricity supply and service. It must 
be possible to determine respective register (journal) and sequence of the entry.  
13. Distribution licensee is obliged to keep all those registers (journals) during 3 years, on 
the basis of which entered information is represented in unified register of electricity 
supply and service.  
14. Information represented in unified register of electricity supply and service is public. 
 
Article 14 
Termination of electricity supply and service 
1.  If carrying out of scheduled repair and reconstruction works will terminate electricity 
supply to the consumers, they shall be informed about the termination of electricity 
supply and its duration preliminary, for at least 3 days. (This information is possible to 
be delivered to the consumer via different information sources). In case of violation of 
the  given  condition,  termination  of  electricity  supply  shall  be  postponed 
correspondingly. 
2.  If  the  consumer  during  one  month  twice  in  succession  deliberately  does  not  permit 
the  representative  of  Distribution  licensee  to  an  electricity  meter,  the  Distribution 
licensee  is  authorized  to  terminate  electricity  supply  to  the  consumer.  Only  an 
obvious interference in the activities of the representative of the Distribution licensee 
by  the  consumer  is  considered  as  the  non–admission  of  the  representative  of 
Distribution licensee to an electricity meter by the consumer. 
3.  The consumer is entitled to decline the services of Distribution Licensee and it shall 
be  informed  to  the  relevant  Distribution  Licensee,  prior,  at  least,  10  days.  In  such 
17 
 
case, the consumer is obliged to make final payment (This paragraph does not apply to 
the cases envisaged by Article 28 of these Rules). 
4.  Termination  of  service  does  not  exempt  the  consumer  from  the  obligation  to  cover 
the costs of consumed electricity. 
5.  In  case  the  consumer  moves  to  another  address  or/and  the  Distribution  licensee 
terminates the service, the Distribution licensee is authorized to require or/and charge 
unpaid amount of money arisen from the final payment to the person responsible for 
payment  (to  an  assigned  responsible  person  for  payment  under  Article  4  of  these 
Rules) or transfer accrued debt to this consumer’s new address (In case the consumer 
moves to a different address in the area of this Distribution licensee). 
6.  If termination of electricity supply causes deterioration of a person’s life or health or 
incomparably big costs in respect of accrued debts and this becomes a known fact to 
the  representative  of  the  Distribution  Licensee,  he  is  obliged  to  consider  this 
circumstance  and  determine  the  additional  time-frame  for  the  payment  of  accrued 
debt  and  termination  of  electricity  supply  (reasonable  time-frame)  that  shall  not  be 
less  than  one  month.  In  case  of  determination  of  the  additional  time  frame  the 
corresponding protocol shall be drawn up and handed over to the consumer under the 
terms defined in these Rules. 
7.  The  rule  defined  under  paragraph  6  of  this  Article  also  applies  to  the  case  of  illegal 
consumption of the electricity. For the next period upon revealing such fact until the 
metering is reorganized the accrual of consumed electricity shall not be carried out as 
it is envisaged in case of illegal consumption of the electricity. 
 
Article 15 
Electricity Supply by Distribution Licensee to the Retail Consumer via Electricity 
Network owned by other person 
1.  The  person,  who  is  not  the  Distribution  licensee  but  owns  electricity  network  is 
obliged to endure using his own network and pass through electricity for the purpose 
of supplying other consumers with electricity under Civil Code of Georgia. 
2.  For enduring electricity pass  through and network usage the compensation is issued 
according to the defined rule under Civil Code of Georgia. 
3.  The agreement between the Distribution licensee and the owner of the network shall 
not cause deterioration of electricity supply for a retail consumer including rising the 
price of electricity.  
4.  In case of utilizing the network owned by other person, the Distribution Licensee is 
not authorized to pay for electricity to the network owner more than it is set by the 
Commission  for  the  service  of  electricity  pass  through  in  the  section  of  distribution 
network of the same voltage and similar technical data.   
5.  Upon  supplying  electricity  via  branched  network  from  a  network  belonged  to  a 
consumer  (or  consumers)  to  other  consumers,  metering  point  shall  be  organized  on 
each  consumer’s  branch  and  individual  meters  shall  be  installed.    In  addition  to 
18 
 
individual meters, metering point shall be organized and controlling electricity meter 
shall be installed up to the given branch (under the rule envisaged by these Rules). 
6.  In  case  of  assignation  of  a  part  of  real  property  from  one  person  to  another  for  a 
temporary use, registration of a temporary user (direct possessor) as a subscriber (upon 
request),  is  carried  out  under  the  conditions  envisaged  by  these  Rules,  only  after 
proper  organization  of  individual  metering  point  which  will  help  the  Distribution 
Licensee  to  determine  individual  consumption  of  electricity  by  this  consumer 
(subscriber).  In  case  envisaged  by  this  paragraph,  organization  of  electricity  wiring 
and  metering  point  of  temporary  user  is  not  the  obligation  of  the  Distribution 
Licensee though the latter is obliged, in compliance with requirements of these Rules, 
to draw up an act about the inspection of electricity meter (metering point). 
7.  In case the consumer (subscriber) temporarily uses the part of a real property and if 
he  receives  electricity  via  owner’s  electricity  network  that  is  then  branched  to 
different consumers (subscribers) of electricity network, consumed electricity by this 
consumer is purchased according to the controlling meter installed before branching. 
The  abovementioned  meter  is  a  settlement  meter  and  covers  the  costs  of  consumed 
electricity  with  the  same  tariffs  as  it  is  received/recorded  in  the  electricity  meter  of 
the relevant voltage level from the distribution network. In this case the Distribution 
Licensee is obliged to: 
a)  deliver  service  for  each  consumer  under  current  legislation  and  conditions 
envisaged by these Rules;  
b)  carry  out  the  settlement  individually  with  the  consumer,  issue  a bill individually 
and charge him/her with the cost according to consumed electricity; 
c) to reallocate the difference between the controlling (settlement) meter and the sum 
of  individual meters of each subscriber  caused by technical loss in proportion with 
consumed electricity by the consumers; 
d) to examine the issue and express his position in case of dispute between consumers 
about accrual; 
e) Correct data on the basis of consumer’s controlling and individual meter readings if 
necessary under current legislation and conditions envisaged by these Rules;  
f)  In  case  of  non-payment  of  debts  timely,  to  supply  the  electricity  provided  to 
terminate  the  electricity  supply  to  that  consumer  who  is  charged  with  debt.  The 
Distribution licensee may apply this subparagraph only in case if it is not possible to 
terminate  electricity  supply  to  the  abovementioned  consumer  by  the  Distribution 
licensee.  
8.  If  two  or  more  consumers  are  located  in  one  building  whose  individual  metering  is 
technically  impossible  or  inappropriate,  only  in  case  of  prior  approval  of  the 
Commission,  the  Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  record  consumed  electricity 
and  carry  out  settlement  via  the  meter  recording  total  costs  on  the  basis  of  written 
agreement with the abovementioned consumer. In such case the Distribution licensee 
is obliged to: 
19 
 
a)     Submit timely the written agreement with the consumer to the Commission; 
b)     Register  each  consumer  as  a  subscriber  and  deliver  service  on  the  basis  of  the 
written agreement with them and under these Rules;  
 
Article 16 
Open (Public) Information 
1. Distribution licensee is obliged to make the following information accessible in the service 
centers: 
a) Types of available and planned services, discounts and benefits (if so); 
b) Distribution, pass through and consumption tariffs and related changes; 
c) Consumer data history and responses to their applications (this shall be accessible only to a 
given consumer); 
d) Report of last year (years) activities, as well as, work plan and investment program for the 
next year; 
e)  Written  records  of  termination  of  electricity  supply  and  deviation  (unsteadiness)  from 
allowable standard of voltage, and other writings in register (journal) envisaged under these 
Rules; 
f)  About  low  capacity  power  plants,  with  indication  of  estimated  cost  of  electricity  and 
contact details (on the basis of given information by the low capacity power plants); 
g) Other public information envisaged by the legislation. 
2.  Under  this  paragraph,  electricity  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  declare  (dispose)  
information in available place (on the official page, as well) and at the same time information 
about  other  persons  must  be  protected  from  disclosure;  Submitted  information  must  be 
updated  in a shortest  time-frame (not later than 5 working days)  –  with indication of time 
and date of last updating. 
3. Distribution licensee is obliged to put those rules on the visible place in service centers, as 
well as all formal notes or documents, concerning issues of service and payments. 
 
Article 17 
Rule for drawing up an Act 
1.  Representatives  of  Distribution  licensee  are  obliged  to  draw  up  a  corresponding  Act  for 
the  purpose  of  registering  electricity  meter  installation,  meter  removal,  violation  by  the 
20 
 
consumer  of  terms  and  obligations    envisaged  by  these  Rules    or/and  by  agreement, 
termination  and  restoration    of  electricity  supply  or  other  fact  (occasion).  Moreover, 
drawing  up  an  Act  is  not  obligatory  in  case  termination,  for  the  reason  of  indebtedness 
and restoration of electricity supply. 
2.  Electricity distribution licensee gives registration number to the Act and records it in the 
relevant register (journal). 
3.  An act shall  include: 
a)  Circumstance that is the purpose to draw up an act; 
b)  Date and place of drawing up an Act; Position, name and last name of draftsman; data 
on consumer; Other necessary information for case decision; 
c)  An Act is signed by draftsman and consumer (if these Rules or/and  current  legislation 
envisage  condition  of  presence  of  consumer);  Moreover,  an  Act  can  be  signed  by 
witnesses if there are any; 
d)  Different proofs, indication of violation and other facts can enclosed to an Act; 
e)  If  a  person  refuses  to  sign  an  Act  a  relevant  record  shall  be  done.  The  person,  who 
refused  to  sign,  has  a  right  to  enclose  explanations  and  remarks,  as  well  as,  to  give 
reasons for refusal on signing. 
4.  Upon  revealing  of  violation  of  conditions  and  obligations    envisaged by  these  Rules 
or/and agreement, an Act  additionally should include: 
a) Violation fact, date and place; 
b) Name and address of witnesses or/and affected individuals, if any; 
c) Explanatory note (if requested); 
d) Installed capacity of consumer's own electricity installations (if necessary); 
e) Information about grounding (if needed); 
f) Whether violation was corrected on spot. 
5. Additional notes are written in an Act about electricity meter (metering point) inspection: 
a) Type and number of electricity meter, reading at the inspection moment and constant of 
electricity meter; 
b) Numbers and condition of stamps; 
c) Data of current and voltage transformers; 
d) Number of disk rotations of electricity meter (number of impulses for electronic electricity 
meter) and corresponding time. 
21 
 
e) Name of used  electricity meter and serial number, validity of attesting, accuracy rating; 
f)  In  case  of  three-phase  meter,  additionally  must  be  indicated  results  of  measurement  of 
primary and secondary current and voltage. 
6.  In  case  of  installation  or  removal  of  electricity  meter,  in  an  Act  additionally  must  be 
recorded: 
a) Technical characteristics, number and reading of electricity meter (meters); 
b) Number of stamp; 
c) Explanation of removal or/and installation of electricity meter; 
d) Name of laboratory where inspection will be held (in case of removal of electricity meter). 
7. If due to other circumstances, removal of consumer's electricity meter is needed, it must 
be  placed  in  a  separate  package  and  sealed.  If  needed,  electricity  meter  shall  be  sent  for 
inspection  in  a  corresponding  laboratory,  upon  request  of  consumer.  Distribution  licensee 
implements sending electricity meter with an Act to a laboratory. 
8.  In  case  the  consumer  does  not  attend  a  drawing  up  of  an  Act  on illegal consumption  of 
electricity or denies signing it, an Act shall be sent to the consumer via insured letter. 
9. Upon accounting of received and consumed electricity via two or more electricity meters, 
an Act must be drawn up in accordance with electricity meter on corresponding feed source 
of electricity supply. 
10. Representatives of administration body or institution may attend the drawing up an Act 
and it must be confirmed by their signatures. 
11. An Act shall be drawn up in two copies. One copy is given to consumer and the second to 
the Distribution licensee. In case of removal of electricity meter, an Act shall be drawn up in 
three copies. The third copy with electricity meter will be sent in the laboratory. 
12.  It  is  prohibited  to  execute  any  activities  under  Act,  if  it  is  drawn  up  with  violation  of 
conditions or/and procedures envisaged by these Rules. 
13. From the date of drawing up an Act, the Distribution licensee is obliged to keep a formal 
note  and  removed  electricity  meter,  for  the  reason  of  technical  failure,  at  least  during  one 
22 
 
year  (except  for  the  cases,  when  the  electricity  meter  after  repairing  was  installed  to  the  
same consumer). 
Article 18 
Relations between a low capacity power plant and a retail consumer 
1.  Retail consumer is entitled to purchase electricity from the Distribution licensee, as well 
as, from the low capacity power plant, on the basis of Power Purchase Agreement drawn 
up under corresponding rule. 
2.  Low capacity power plant is obliged to pass a copy of Power Purchase Agreement with a 
retail  consumer  to  a  respective  Distribution  licensee  and  provide  electricity  supply  to  a 
retail consumer in a time-frame envisaged in the agreement. 
3.  In a feasible short term, Distribution licensee is obliged to set an initial date of electricity 
supply from low capacity power plant to retail consumer and provide implementation of 
Power Purchase Agreement, in accordance with conditions of these Rules. 
4.  Low-capacity power plant is entitled to deny signing of Power Purchase Agreement, if it 
is  obviously  impossible  to  carry  out  service  for  the  consumer  due  to  technical  or  other 
reasonable condition. 
5.  Purchasing    electricity  by  a  retail  consumer  from  a  low-capacity  power  plant  does  not 
exempt  the    Distribution  licensee  from    any  other  obligation  or  liability  envisaged  by 
these Rules; the  Distribution licensee is obliged to  execute  services for  a retail consumer  
of  distribution  network  and  electricity  meter  (metering  point),  electricity  pass  through, 
electricity  supply,  termination  or  renovation    of  supply,  as  well  as,  charge  and  cover  of 
price of consumed electricity and service, with the same conditions and procedures, as in 
the case of electricity distribution for a retail consumer.  
6.  Responsibility for payment of cost of electricity charged to a retail consumer under these 
Rules lies on a low-capacity power plant, and responsibilities for accounting of consumed 
electricity,  writing  a  bill  and  its  delivery  to  a  retail  consumer  are  within  bounds  of 
Distribution  licensee  –  a  possessor  of  a  respective  distribution  network.  This  condition 
does not apply when agreement between Distribution licensee and a low-capacity power 
plant envisage other conditions. 
7.  Payment of consumed electricity cost  by a retail customer, envisaged by Power Purchase 
Agreement,  implies  fulfillment  of  all  those  obligations    from  a  retail  consumer  that  was 
carried out  for supplying this consumer with electricity,  under current legislation, these 
Rules  and  the  Agreement;  It  is  not  permitted  to  charge  retail  consumer  with  any  other 
one-time  payment  for  electricity  purchasing  and  supply,  except  electricity  consumption 
23 
 
price,  set  by  Power  Purchase  Agreement  and    Article  19  of  these  Rules.  All  other 
individual payments (for electricity meter, correction, illegal consumption and other one-
time payments) shall be reflected in consumer’s bill separately under these Rules. 
8.  Upon payment of consumed electricity price by a retail consumer, a low-capacity power 
plant is obliged to fulfill all obligations for providing the retail consumer with electricity 
under current legislation and these Rules. 
9.  Upon purchasing electricity from a low-capacity power plant by a retail customer, a bill 
instead of consumer’s  tariff  indicates consumption price of electricity  (under agreement) 
and  payment,  charged  for  the  consumer,  with  shared  and  total  indicators  for  a  low-
capacity power plant and Distribution licensee. 
10.  In case of purchasing of electricity from a low-capacity power plant under these Rules, 
the retail consumer shall pay in a bank account indicated in the bill. 
11.  For supplying a retail consumer with electricity, a low-capacity power plant is obliged to 
have  a  corresponding  agreements  on  services  of  dispatching,  transmission  or/and  pass 
through of electricity, in accordance with these Rules and current legislation.  
 
Article 19 
Power Purchase Agreement between a low-capacity power plant and a retail consumer 
1.  Under  the  Power  Purchase  Agreement  between  a  low-capacity  power  plant  and  retail 
consumer  electricity  consumption    price    includes  cost  of  power  generation  and  all  those 
services  (transmission,  distribution,  pass  through,  provide  the  system  reserve  and  other) 
that are needed for permanent and stable supply of retail consumer with electricity, under 
current legislation and conditions of these Rules. 
2.  In case of purchasing of electricity by a retail customer from a low-capacity power plant, it 
is prohibited to terminate  electricity supply to a retail customer, whether supplied amount  
and  capacity  from  a  low-capacity  power  plant  to  a  retail  customer,  are  proper  or  not. 
Moreover,  payments  by  a  low-capacity  power  plant  of  price  of  executed  services  and 
expenses  for  supplying retail  consumer  with  electricity  are  relative  to  actual  expenses  for 
supplying retail consumers with electricity. 
 
 
 
24 
 
Article 20 
Execution of Power Purchase Agreement between a low-capacity power plant and retail 
consumer 
1.  For the purpose of execution of Power Purchase Agreement between a low-capacity power 
plant  and  retail  consumer,  agreement  must  be  passed  to  the  Distribution  licensee,  who 
passes through the electricity, fills actual consumption or/and provides system reserve. 
2.  Along  with  Power  Purchase  Agreement  between  a  low-capacity  power  plant  and  retail 
consumer,  a  low-capacity  power  plant  shall  provide    the  corresponding  Distribution 
licensee with the following documentation: 
a) Name of retail consumer and address, where electricity should be supplied; 
b) Requested capacity for the consumer; in case of non-household consumer, time schedule 
of annual, monthly, daily and one-hour forecasting supply and consumption of electricity. 
c) Agreements about dispatch and, if needed, about transmission; 
d) Conditions of providing retail consumer with system reserve capacity. 
3.  The  Distribution  licensee,  except  for  the  case  envisaged  by  Paragraph  6  of  the  given 
Article,  in  accordance  with  concrete  Power  Purchase  Agreement,  is  obliged  to  deny  pass 
through of electricity and relevant service, if: 
a)  Under  the  Power  Purchase  Agreement  the  time-frame  for  beginning  of  electricity 
purchasing is obviously inconsistent with these Rules; 
b) Conditions of providing retail consumer with system reserve capacity are not specified; 
c)  Date  of  supply  and  expected  capacities  of  electricity  is  not  defined  by  a  low-capacity 
power plant; 
d) Corresponding agreements on electricity dispatch and, if needed, service of transmission, 
are not registered by a low-capacity power plant. 
4.  After  receiving  Power  Purchase  Agreement  between  retail  customer  and  a  low-capacity 
power plant, the Distribution licensee is obliged to determine an exact date of beginning of 
electricity  supply from a low-capacity  power plant  to  a corresponding retail consumer in a 
time-frame  of  5  days.  Date  of  beginning  of  electricity  supply  shall  not  exceed  40  calendar 
days  from  receiving  of  the  agreement  (if  the  electricity  purchasing  agreement  between  a 
low-capacity power plant and retail consumer does not envisage more late date of beginning 
25 
 
of electricity supply). The Distribution licensee is obliged to notify parties about exact date of 
beginning of electricity supply, as soon as defined. 
5. On the base of Power Purchase Agreement, a date of beginning of electricity supply from a 
low-capacity  power  plant  to  a  respective  retail  consumer  must  be  a  date  of  beginning  of  a 
calendar month. 
6.  If  retail  consumer  is  supplied  with  electricity  directly  from  a  low-capacity  power  plant, 
low-capacity power plant is obliged to record, along with the electricity, generated by him 
and delivered to bus-bar, data on electricity consumption by a retail consumer and present 
them as required. 
7.  If  a  low-capacity  power  plant  supplies  a  retail  consumer  with  electricity  without 
participation  of  Transmission  and  Distribution  licensees  or  it  is  technically  impossible  to 
supply  consumer  via  Transmission  or  Distribution  licensees,  Power  Purchase  Agreement, 
between a low-capacity power plant and retail customer, does not require to be handed over 
to  Distribution  licensee  and  to  be  provided  the  system  reserve  by  Distribution  licensee. 
Distribution  licensee  cannot  be  charged  with  any  liabilities  in  connection  with  electricity 
supply of retail consumer, envisaged by this Paragraph. 
 
Article 21 
Relations between a low-capacity power plant and Distribution licensee 
1.  In case of purchasing of electricity by a retail consumer from a low-capacity power plant, 
in accordance with consumptions of a retail consumer, the Distribution licensee reserves 
(creates) system reserve under conditions of current legislation; Low-capacity power plant 
is obliged to cover expenses for providing of system reserve for the retail consumer. 
2.  Distribution  licensee  (with  consideration  of  interests  of  a  low-capacity  power  plant)  is 
obliged to draw an agreement with a bank and under this agreement a sum paid by a retail 
consumer (to an account indicated in check) will be transferred to the accounts of a low-
capacity  power  plant  and  distribution  licensee,  simultaneously  in  accordance  with  their 
shares.  A  low-capacity  power  plant  and  the  Distribution  licensee  can  agree  on  other 
method of mutual settlement. 
3.  If  the  retail  consumer  does  not  cover  cost  of  purchased  electricity  or/and  service  in 
indicated  date  in  the  bill,  the    Distribution  licensee,  in  connection  with  the  retail 
26 
 
customer, is liable to act in accordance with conditions of these Rules for similar cases of 
electricity distribution (provides the termination of electricity supply for this customer, as 
well).  Moreover,  after  10  days  from  consumer’s  failing  to  cover  the  debt  on  due  time 
indicated  in  the  bill,  the  Distribution  licensee  notifies  a  low-capacity  power  plant  and 
determines  a  reasonable  time-frame  for  covering  indebtedness.  If  indebtedness  is  not 
covered  after  expiration  of  the  time-frame,  the  Distribution  licensee  is  liable  to  request 
bank  guarantee  from  a  low-capacity  power  plant  for  securing  future  payments  for 
electricity or/and pass through service. 
4.  If a low-capacity power plant does not cover the cost of electricity pass- through or/and 
indebtedness  of  a  corresponding  retail  consumer  or  cannot  submit  financial  guarantee 
required by the Distribution licensee, upon notification of parties the Distribution licensee 
is  entitled  to  keep  out  the  low-capacity  power  plant  from  distribution  network,  unless 
mentioned conditions are not met. In this case, the Distribution licensee is obliged to offer 
distribution  service  to  a  corresponding  consumer  of  a  low-capacity  power  plant,  under 
conditions of these Rules. 
 
Article 22  
Agreement on electricity pass through for a retail consumer via distribution network 
1.  Upon  request,  the  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  draw  up  an  agreement  with  a  low 
capacity power plant about pass through of electricity for a retail consumer, which is valid 
until other decision by parties is not received. 
2.  For  the  purpose  of  drawing  up  an  agreement  about  pass-through,  a  low  capacity  power 
plant shall apply to the Distribution licensee with corresponding application. 
3.  Application about electricity pass through must include: 
a) Details of applicant (low capacity power plant); 
b) Name, address and bank details of legal person or individual entrepreneur (as well as, 
other form of legal entity), responsible for payment of cost of electricity pass through; 
c) In accordance with current legislation and these Rules, consent of a low-capacity power 
plant on payment of costs arisen from electricity pass through and service of supplying of 
retail consumer with electricity. 
d) Location and title of the Distribution licensee’s electricity delivery points; 
e)  Schedule  of  annual,  monthly,  daily  and  hourly  forecasting  supply  of  electricity  to 
delivery  points,  with  indication  of  conditions,  sources  and  corresponding  capacities  to 
balance actual supply and consumption of electricity. 
27 
 
4. Data given in Subparagraph “e” of Paragraph 3 of the given Article depends on the Power 
Purchase Agreement signed by respective low-capacity power plant and retail consumer, 
and  electricity  consumption  capacities  of  retail  consumer  (consumers).  Change  of 
mentioned  data  does  not  require  changing  in  electricity  pass-through  application  or  in 
pass-through agreement. 
5.  Not  later  than  4  working  days  from  receiving  of  application  on  electricity  passing-
through,  the  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  draw  up  the  agreement  on  electricity 
passing-through with low-capacity power plant. 
6. After submitting a filled application to the Distribution licensee in accordance with this 
Article,  conditions  requested  under  the  application  will  be  included  in  electricity  pass-
through agreement. 
7.  Despite  of  disagreement  on  electricity  pass-through  individual  or/and  unforeseen 
conditions envisaged by these Rules, the Distribution licensee is obliged, after expiration 
of  5  working  days  from  submitting  of  application  and  on  the  base  of  conditions  in  the 
application, presented  in compliance  with Paragraph 4 of this  Article, to  carry  out pass-
through  of  electricity  and  in  compliance  with  conditions  and  procedures  of  these  Rules 
and  ensure  fulfillment  of  electricity  pass-through  agreement  between  a  low-capacity 
power plant and a retail consumer. 
8. Electricity pass-through agreement must envisage terms to balance an actual supply and 
consumption  of  electricity,  among  them,  terms  to  prevent  results  arisen  from  non-
delivery  of  appropriate  capacity  of  electricity  by  a  low-capacity  power  plant  and  other 
negative  circumstances,  as  well  as,  conditions  of  activities  under  circumstances,  which 
possibly result in forced limitation of consumers in electricity distributing system. 
9. Distribution licensee has no right to refuse electricity pass-through via his private grid, 
except cases, when denial is justified by non-payment of pass-through fees. 
10. In accordance with a tariff for the service, adopted by the Commission, the Distribution 
licensee  receives  compensation  for  electricity  passing-through,  respectively  to  actual 
amount of passed-through electricity via his private grid. 
 
 
28 
 
Article 23 
Reimbursement of the fee for consumed electricity and service to low capacity power plant 
by a retail consumer 
1.  Under current legislation and these Rules, a low capacity power plant is obliged to fulfill 
all obligations to ensure a stable supply of electricity for a retail consumer. 
2.  Under these Rules and the agreement, in case of non-delivery of electricity, envisaged by 
Power  Purchase  Agreement,  a  low-capacity  power  plant  is  obliged  to  compensate 
incurred costs to the Distribution licensee for supplying retail customer with electricity. 
3.  If  the  pass-through  electricity  agreement  does  not  envisage  other  terms,  settlement 
between a low-capacity power plant and the Distribution licensee will be as follows: 
a)  When  at  the  end  of  the  reporting  period  it    turns  out  that  electricity  owned  by  the 
Distribution licensee was consumed, the Distribution licensee has a right to require to 
compensate  the    damage  from  a  low-capacity  power  plant  (if  any),  as  well  as, 
electricity, consumed by a retail consumer, by a consumer tariff. 
b)  When  at  the  end  of  the  reporting  period  it  turns  out  that  electricity  consumed 
(received)  by  a  retail  consumer  is  less  that  electricity  received  by  the  Distribution 
licensee for supplying retail consumer, the Distribution licensee is obliged to pay to a 
low-capacity  power  plant  a  cost  of  electricity  that  was  not  supplied  to  the  retail 
consumer under Power Purchase Agreement with the price arisen from the difference 
between electricity consumption price and pass through service price. 
4.  In case electricity pass through tariff does not envisage normative losses in electricity 
distribution grid, the Distribution licensee fills (compensates) extra-normative losses. 
In case electricity pass-through tariff includes compensation of electricity normative 
losses, the Distribution licensee is obliged to refill actual loss of received electricity in 
delivery point and in distribution pass through network. 
 
Article 24 
Purchasing electricity on the bus bar of small capacity power plant by a retail 
consumer 
1.  In case of purchasing electricity on the bus bar of low-capacity power plant by a retail 
consumer  for  ensuring  the  purposes  under  these  Rules,  while  passing  through  and 
supplying electricity the same requirements and obligations that are envisaged in case 
of  electricity  supply  to  retail  consumers  by  low  capacity  power  plant  apply  to  the 
abovementioned retail consumers.   
29 
 
2.  In case of purchasing electricity on the bus bar of low-capacity power plant, the retail 
consumer is obliged to provide execution of an agreement or a contract for supplying 
electricity under the legislation.      
 
Article 25 
Electricity supply by the retail consumer in the distribution network 
 
1.  The retail consumer is authorized to connect his own low-capacity power plant (the 
design capacity of which does not exceed 100 kW) to the Distribution licensee free of 
charge and  carry out supply of electricity produced by him under current legislation 
and defined terms under these Rules. The Distribution licensee is obliged to support 
the  connection  to  the  distribution  network  of  any  power  plant  and  communicate 
with electricity producers under the legislation and defined terms under these Rules. 
2.  The  retail  consumer  who  owns  a  low-capacity  power  plant  the  design  capacity  of 
which does not exceed 100 kW is authorized to request the offset of electricity cost 
produced and supplied in the Distribution licensee’s network by him (after charging 
the  retail  consumer  by  the  Distribution  licensee  under  relevant  rule)  from  the 
electricity cost received (consumed) from the distribution network, or/and refund the 
paid amount during the next settlement.  
3.  The  distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  consider  the  amount  of  electricity  produced 
and  supplied  by  the  retail  consumer  in  the  distribution  licensee  network  while 
settlement with the retail consumer, in the settlement bill, together with the cost of 
consumed electricity by the retail consumer in the corresponding settlement period, 
the information about obligation fulfillment shall be indicated.  
4.  In case of electricity production and supply in the distribution network by the retail 
consumer,  the  relationship  is  carried  out  under  these  Rules  and  the  agreement 
between the Distribution licensee and the retail consumer.  
5.  If  no  other  condition  is  agreed  between  the  Distribution  licensee  and  the  retail 
consumer, the obligations while settlement shall be fulfilled as follows: 
The offset of the cost of the  electricity supplied in the distribution network shall be 
carried  out  from  the  electricity  cost  received  (consumed)  from  the  Distribution 
licensee  network;  electricity  cost  supplied  in  the  distribution  network  by  the  retail 
consumer equals the difference between the price of electricity received (consumed) 
from the distribution network by him and electricity distribution tariffs.  
6.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  not  required  to  provide  the  connection  of  low-capacity 
power plant to the distribution network, purchase technical equipment necessary for 
the  connection  and  carry  out  construction  and  maintenance  works  (including 
purchasing and installing reversible counter). In addition, he is obliged to develop and 
issue  Technical  Condition  for  connection  of  a  low-capacity  power  plant  to  the 
distribution  network  the  design  capacity  of  which  does  not  exceed  100  kW.  While 
30 
 
developing  the  above  mentioned  Technical  Condition,  the  Distribution  licensee  is 
obliged  to  define  the  connection  point  and  other  requirements  necessary  for  this 
connection  so  that  its  performance  shall  be  connected  to  possible  small  costs 
(considering factual circumstances). 
 
Article 26 
Connection of a new consumer to the distribution network 
1.  While  connecting  a  new  consumer  (electrical  network  of  a  new  consumer)  to  the 
distribution network, the connection fee is paid only in the cases directly envisaged under 
these Rules. Payment for connecting is a one-time payment. Moreover, parties can agree on 
advance cover and phased payment of the connection fee. 
2.  The  person  wishing  to  connect  (applicant)  is  obliged  to  address  a  corresponding 
Distribution  licensee  on  connection  request  to  the  distribution  network  (in  electronic  or 
written form).  
3.  Rules and requirements for the connection of new consumers to the distribution network 
(Articles  26  and  261)  apply  only  to  the  connection  of  the  residential  apartment,   
enterprises,  or  other  facilities  to  the  distribution  network  that  are  not  connected  to  the 
distribution  network  and  they  were  not  supplied  with  electricity  according  to  the 
conditions  under  the  legislation.    Also,  when  real  estate  is  separated  (separation  of  a 
subscriber)  and  there  is  a  registration  request  from  a  separated  property  owner  as  a 
subscriber (non-household consumer). 
4.  Requirements for the connection of new consumers to the distribution network (Articles 26 
and 261of these Rules) do not apply to supply  residential apartments, enterprises or other 
facilities with electricity with already issued Technical Condition and is  (or was) supplied 
with  electricity  under  current  legislation  (Except  the  case  envisaged  by  2nd  sentence  of 
Paragraph 3 of this Article). 
5.  The change of legal form of the consumer, or his/her real estate, or the owner on the part of 
the property (except for the request of the owner of the separated property to register as a 
subscriber  –non-household  consumer)  is  not  the  basis  for  the  consumers  (or  new 
consumers) to pay the connection fee to the distribution network or change it. In addition, 
temporary connection to the distribution network for supplying seasonal (not more than 6 
month during the calendar year) facilities with electricity of 0.4 kV voltage and not more 
than 30kW capacity  and  also for supplying construction works and  electrical installations 
31 
 
and  facilities  used  for  this  purpose  and  the  case  of  providing  the  existing  consumer 
(subscriber) with alternative (back-up) power is not  the reason for paying the connection 
fee. 
5.  1  If  real  estate  is  separated  (separation  of  a  subscriber)  and  there  is  a  registration  request 
from  the  separated  property  owner  as  a  subscriber  –  non-household  consumer-  the 
Distribution licensee is authorized to charge a new consumer only with incurred costs on 
organizing  the  metering  point  but  not  more  than  100  GEL  including  VAT  (including  the 
costs of purchasing and organizing a new meter and other equipment). 
6.  The  fee  for  connecting  a  new  consumer  to  0.4  kV  (380/220  V)  ssand  6/10  kV  voltage 
distribution  network  is  determined  according  to  the  connection  capacity  with  offered 
packages (Annex #4).  
7.  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  upon  receiving  application  about  connection  of  a  new 
consumer  (electrical  network  of  a  new  consumer)  to  0.4  kV(380/220  V)  and    6/10  kV 
voltage  distribution  network  to  start  reviewing  the  application  and  carry  out  necessary 
activities for providing requested connection. 
8.  Activities for connecting of a new consumer (electrical network of a new consumer) to 0.4 
kV.  (380/220V)  and  6/10  kV  distribution  network  can  be  carried  out  only  by  the 
Distribution  licensee  who    provides  with  all  work  and  expenses  necessary  to  connect  the 
new  consumer  (electrical  network  of  a  new  consumer)  to  his  own  area,  including 
construction  of  distribution  network,  purchasing  equipment,  design  and  construction  of 
connection,  getting  consent    or  authorization  and  all  necessary  activities  and  work 
(including  organizing  a  metering  point  and  the  beginning of  electricity  supply)  related  to 
the connection of the new consumer to the distribution network and electricity supply. 
9.  It  is  not  allowed  for  the  person  wishing  to  connect  (applicant)  to  purchase  necessary 
facilities  for  the  connection  or/and  carry  out  works  for  requested  connection  on  the 
distribution  network  or  take  part  in  getting  any  kind  of  consent  or  authorization.    The 
person  wishing  to  connect  (applicant)  is  not  obliged  to  submit  any  additional 
documentation or information (except the information given in the application), or attend 
the beginning of the electricity supply. In the process of connecting a new consumer to the 
distribution network, the Distribution licensee is obliged to have relation with the person 
wishing to connect (applicant) only through one authorized person. 
10.  After paying the part of connection fee of a new consumer to the distribution network, 
the Distribution licensee is obliged to carry out connection works (with full technological 
cycle)  of  a  new  consumer  (or  consumers)  to  0,220kV,  0,380kV    and  6/10kV  voltage 
distribution network: 
32 
 
a)  In  those  territorial  boundaries  (cities,  small  towns  and  villages)  where  he  carries 
 
out electricity distribution activities; 
 
b) From existing distribution network; 
 
b. a) In case of new consumer of 0.4. kV voltage - 800 m in radius; 
 
b. b) In case of new consumer of 6/10 kV voltage - 6 km in radius. 
 
11.  The  connection  of  a  new  consumer  shall  be  carried  out  according  to  the  required 
conditions by  the person wishing to  connect (applicant). The person wishing to connect (a 
new consumer) is authorized to choose (request by application):  
a)  Metering  point  voltage  level,  on  which  metering  point  shall  be  arranged 
 
(except for the cases envisaged by Paragraph 9 of Article 261 of these Rules); 
 
b) Connection Capacity on the corresponding voltage level, where  metering  point  shall 
 
be arranged in accordance with the offered package. 
12.  If  after  construction  of    residential  apartments,  enterprises  or  other  facilities,  three  or 
more new consumers (new consumer's electrical network) are connected to the distribution 
network,  the amount of connection fee (based on offered package) shall be determined  in 
compliance with the amount of capacity to be connected defined (set)  by a construction and 
design documentation of this facility(facilities). 
13. After connecting a residential apartment, enterprise or other facility  to  the distribution 
network and registering those consumers as a subscriber, the Distribution licensee is obliged 
to deliver service to these consumers (subscribers) in compliance with terms established by 
the  Commission,  and  to  carry  out  accounting  and  settlement  of  consumed  electricity 
individually. 
14.  A  new  consumer  connected  to  the  distribution  network  is  not  required  to  submit  a 
special application for registering as a subscriber and repeatedly carry out activities envisaged 
by Article 4 of these Rules.  
Article 261 
Procedures for the Connection of new Consumers to the Distribution Network 
1.  In case of construction of the residential apartment, the enterprise or other object, as well 
as  the  separation  of  the  property  (subscriber),  when  new  consumer  is  connected  to  the 
33 
 
distribution network (according to the Paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of Article 26), the person (or 
group of persons)should submit the application “For the Connection of the New Consumer 
to the Distribution Network” to the Distribution licensee (in electronic or written form).If 
the  requested  connection  does  not  comply  with  the  definition  of  the  connection  of  new 
consumer defined in these Rules, its review is prohibited according to the Articles 26 and 
261 and the Distribution licensee is obliged to refund the applicant with preliminary paid 
connection fee within 10 days. 
2.  Before submission of the application the person wishing to connect (applicant) is obliged to 
pay 50 % of the fee outlined in the application for the connection of new consumer to the 
distribution  network  and  the  rest  shall  be  paid  (if  parties  has  not  agreed  otherwise)  after 
starting of the electricity supply: 
a.  household consumer – within 20 days; 
b.  non-household consumer – within 20 days. 
3.  Upon receiving the application for connecting to a distribution network of a new consumer 
(new consumer’s electricity network), the Distribution licensee takes obligation to provide 
a  new  applicant  with  necessary  service  and  devices  for  electricity  supply  (with  full 
technological cycle), in compliance with conditions, envisaged by these Rules and current 
legislation.  While  connecting  to  the  distribution  network  the  new  applicant  takes 
obligation to pay a fee for the connection of new consumer to the distribution network and 
follow the terms envisaged by the current legislation and these Rules. 
4.  The  person  wishing  to  connect  (applicant)  is  obliged  to  make  an  inquiry  (with  standard 
template  approved  by  the  Commission)  for  new  connection  to  the  relevant  Distribution 
licensee  in  electronic  or  written  form.  In  addition,  the  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to 
determine  the  completeness  of  the  application  and  the  inquiry  described  in  it  and 
immediately reply to the consumer via SMS, as well as electronic or written form envisaged 
in  the  application  (in  the  case  of  a  defect  refusal  must  be  justified).  Otherwise,  the 
application will be accepted. 
5.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  authorized  to  determine  the  defect  in  the  application  for  the 
connection of new consumer to the distribution network (only in cases envisaged in these 
Rules)  and  leave  it  without  examination.  The  reason  for  the  determination  of  defect  or 
leaving  it  without  examination  can  be:  application  is  not  complete  or/and  it  is  submitted 
with  error  (including,  if  the  application  is  not  filled  in  accordance  with  the  standard 
template  approved  by  the  Commission);  in  this  case  the  requested  connection  will  be 
carried out after submission of the new application. 
34 
 
6.  In  case  if  error  was  detected  in  the  application  of  the  inquiry  for  the  connection  of  new 
consumer to the distribution network the Distribution licensee is obliged to pay back to the 
applicant  the  fee  for  the  connection  of  new  consumer    within  10  working  days  (on  the 
account  envisaged  in  the  application).  The  person  wishing  to  connect  (applicant)  is 
authorized to request deferral (delay) of the amount paid (with electronic or written form) 
with the condition to submit a new application. 
7.  The period for providing the network connection of new consumer to the 0.4 kV (380/220 
V) and 6/10 kV includes  the time from submitting the application “For the Connection of 
the  New  Consumer  to  the  Distribution  Network”  until  starting  of  the  electricity  supply 
(according to the application and these Rules) for new consumer (consumers).In addition, 
during determination of the abovementioned period the time of delay for issuing consent or 
authorization  from  administrative  body  is  not  considered  (without  which  the  design, 
construction  and  /  or  installation  activities  is  prohibited).  In  case  of  abovementioned 
situation the Distribution licensee shall immediately notify the  applicant via SMS, or other 
means envisaged in the application (in electronic or written form) in order to stop the time 
flow envisaged for the connection. The time flow will not be stopped if non-issuance of the 
consent or authorization is due to incorrect (not corresponding) activity or inactivity of the 
Distribution licensee.  
8.  If  providing  the  connection  of  new  consumer  to  distribution  network  is  not  finished  in 
provisional  time  (electricity  supply  is  not  started  in  time)  the  connection  fee  of  new 
consumer  is  decreased  by  50  %.    In  case  if  application  of  person  wishing  to  connect 
(applicant) “For the Connection of the New Consumer to the Distribution Network” is left 
without response by the Distribution Licensee, 50 % discounted fee may be applied (in this 
case  resolution  is  received  by  the  Commission  after  relevant  request  of  the  applicant). 
Accordingly,  if  a  person  already  has  paid  fee  for  the  connection  of  new  consumer  the 
Distribution licensee shall refund the overpaid amount to the applicant within 10 working 
days after this circumstance occurred.  
81.  If  providing  the  connection  of  new  consumer  to  distribution  network  is  not  finished  in 
provisional time (electricity supply is not started in time) the Commission is authorized to 
use the measures envisaged by the legislation. 
9.  If the connection of new consumer is requested for the 6/19 kV with connection capacity 
less than 500 kW or technical conditions is requested for the connection of 35/110 kV with 
connection  capacity  less  than  5000  kW,  then  this  type  of  connection  may  be  carried  out 
only if there is a technical necessity on new consumer and if it is obviously impossible to 
organize metering point in a lower voltage level.  
35 
 
10. If connection of new consumer or consumers (network of new consumer or consumers) to 
the  distribution  network  is  requested  for  35  kV  or  more,  or  if  such  kind  of  connection 
where  fee  for  the  connection  of  new  consumer  is  not  applied,  organization  of  electricity 
supply system or/and construction of the connection to the existed electricity distribution 
network for this object shall be carried out according to the mutual agreement between the 
Distribution  licensee  and  the  person  wishing  to  connect  (applicant)  ;  in  case  of 
disagreement the applicant provides all necessary  activities for design and construction (by 
itself  or  by  another  construction  company).  Despite  of  disagreement  the  Distribution 
licensee  is  obliged  to  issue  Technical  Condition  for  the  connection  to  the  distribution 
network  free  of  charge  within  2  weeks  after  receiving  of  the  application.  Unilaterally 
change  of  the  Technical  Condition  within  its period  of  validity  (no  less  than  one year)  is 
prohibited. Technical Condition along with other information should include the following 
information: 
a.  Connection point; 
b.  Connection voltage level; 
c.  Connection capacity (according to the project). 
11. In case of connection of 35 kV or more voltage level new consumer or consumers (network 
of  new  consumer  or  consumers),  as  well  as  in  case  the    connection  where  fee  for  the 
connection of new consumer is not applied,  the Distribution licensee is obliged: 
a.  to    determine  the connection  point  to  the  distribution  network  according  to  the  relevant 
voltage  level  of  existing  distribution  network  while  reviewing  the  application  “For  the 
Connection  of  the  New  Consumer  (electricity  network  of  new  consumer)  to  the 
Distribution Network”; 
b.  while  preparing  the  Technical  Condition  for  the  existing  distribution  network,  to 
determine  the  connection  point  and  other  requirements  for  the  connection  according  to 
the  application depending on  the  technical  feasibility  in  such  way  that  connection  to  the 
distribution network shall be based on the least cost principle;  
c.  Despite  the  fact  who  is  organizing  the  electricity  supply  system  of  the  new  consumer  or 
consumers  or/and  construction  of  the  connection  to  the  existing  electricity  distribution 
network the metering point shall be organized according to the condition envisaged in  the 
written requirement of the Distribution licensee; 
12.  In case if connection fee of the distribution network is not paid in provisional time and if 
agreement  occurred  between  the  Distribution  licensee  and  consumer  about  redistribution 
of the connection fee, the Distribution licensee is authorized to reflect the payment in the 
debt and act according to the Article 9 of these Rules. 
36 
 
Article 27 
Increasing the connection capacity on the distribution network by the consumer 
1. Consumer is obliged to notify to the Distribution licensee preliminary about increasing the 
connection capacity on the distribution network. 
2. If consumer, who is connected to the distribution network of 0,4 kV (380/220 V) and 6/10 
kV  voltage  capacity,    increases    the  capacity  of  actual  consumption  by  more  connection 
capacity  than  it  is  envisaged  under  Technical  Condition,  so  that  change  of  Technical 
condition  is  needed,    in  such  case  the  Distribution  licensee  shall  issue  a  new  Technical 
Condition  and  arrange  electricity  supply  system  to  this  consumer  (Providing  with  a  full 
technological  cycle)  according  to  new  Technical  Conditions.  In  addition,  the  consumer  is 
obliged to pay the fee which is calculated as follows: 
a) If increased (requested) capacity changes in the other offered package of the connection to 
the distribution network, the consumer shall pay the fee for the connection of new consumer 
to the distribution network according to the relevant package, from which is subtracted the 
fee  for  the  connection  of  new  consumer  based  on  the  offered  package  that  complies  with 
connection capacity under existing Technical Condition. 
b) If increased (or requested) capacity does not exceed the offered package for the connection 
of new consumer to the distribution network that complies with connection capacity under 
existing Technical Condition: 
b.a)  For  providing  with  requested  capacity  the  Distribution  licensee  shall  reconstruct 
electrical  network  connecting  to  the  consumer  and  the  metering  point,  or/and  purchase 
other facilities, construct and install and the consumer shall pay the fee for the connection of 
new  consumer  to  the  distribution  network  that  is  calculated  according  to  the  each  kW 
through  dividing  the  connection  fee  of  offered  package  by  the  maximal  capacity  and 
multiplying by additional requested kW by the consumer; 
b.b)    If  requested  capacity  does  not  require  reconstruction  of  electricity  network  (which 
provides connection to the consumer) and metering point or/and purchase, construction and 
installation of other utilities, the consumer shall not pay electricity network connection fee 
(accordingly, new Technical Condition is issued by the Distribution licensee free of charge).  
3.  If  consumer  increases  the  capacity  of  actual  consumption  by  more  connection  capacity 
than  it  is  envisaged  under  Technical  Condition  so  that  supply  of  requested  or  actually 
37 
 
consumed  capacity  requires  reconstruction  of  the  electricity  network  or  metering  point 
or/and  purchase,  construction  and  installation  of  other  utilities,  in  such  case  for  supplying 
the consumer with electricity it is required issuance of Technical Condition once again and 
the consumers shall meet new Technical Conditions of the connection. 
4.  Increase  of  electricity  consumption  capacity  is  attested  by  the  use  of  same  method  with 
which  was  defined  the  consumer’s  connection  capacity  while  developing  a  Technical 
Condition of distribution network connection. 
 
Article 28 
Termination of the contract 
1. Parties in Power Purchase Agreement (except for the Distribution licensee) are entitled to 
terminate  Power  Purchase  Agreement  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  electricity  from  other 
party  under  these  Rules  and  demands  of  current  legislation.  Electricity  buyer  is  entitled  to 
terminate  Power  Purchase  Agreement,  upon  notifying  corresponding  party  (parties)  prior 
one month at least.  
2. Electricity seller, upon receiving a request from a corresponding party on termination of 
Power Purchase Agreement, is obliged to determine the date of termination of his service (in 
agreement with the Distribution licensee), which shall not exceed one calendar month, and 
inform thereof other parties of agreement, as well as, electricity Distribution licensee.  
3. Termination of Power Purchase Agreement or/and rendering of service, does not exempt 
parties from payments for delivered services or/and consumed electricity. 
 
Article 29 
Price for restoring of electricity supply to the consumer 
1.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  entitled  to  charge  electricity  supply  restoring  payment  with 
the consumer who is  disconnected  from  the  network because  of nonpayment of electricity 
cost, illegal consumption of electricity or/and violation of safety regulations.  
2.  Electricity  supply  restoring  payment  does  not  reflect  an  exact  cost  of  termination  and 
restoration  of  electricity  supply  for  different  consumers  and  its  amount  is  calculated 
according  to  the  conventionally  assumed  costs  by  the  Distribution  licensee.  Electricity 
supply restoration payment paid by the consumer represents the income of the Distribution 
licensee  and  the  income  received  will  be  taken  into  account  while  calculating  distribution 
and transmission tariffs.  
3. Price of restoration of electricity supply to the consumers including VAT is determined at 
the level of GEL 2.  
38 
 
4.  Charge  of  electricity  supply  restoration  payment  is  impermissible,  if  termination  of 
electricity  supply  was  not  resulted  from  the  circumstances  defined  in  Paragraph  1  of  this 
Article.  If  electricity  supply  to  the  consumer  was  terminated  illegally  or/and  due  to  other 
factors, payment was incorrectly charged, the Distribution licensee is obliged to correct data 
without delay, re-calculate and restore electricity supply to the consumer free of  charge. 
 
Article 30 
Non-Household consumers 
1. These Rules apply equally household as well as non-household consumers, except for the 
cases envisaged by this Article.  
2. In the application submitted by a non-household consumer for registering as a subscriber 
and,  correspondingly,  the  agreement,  additionally  shall  indicate  requested  capacity  of 
electricity and forecasted amounts. 
3. Upon temporarily use of a real property by a non-household consumer and supplying with 
electricity via network of an owner of the real property, the Distribution licensee is entitled 
to request contract in writing about the compensation of difference between controlling and 
individual meters. The Distribution licensee is entitled to receive (consider) given contract, if 
it does not contradict with the terms envisaged by these Rules.  
4. Electricity meter shall be accessible for the Distribution licensee in the period of working 
of non-household consumers and upon any case of emergency - at any time.  
5.  If  for  a  certain  period  of  time  recording  of consumed  electricity  (with  electricity  meter) 
was not held or/and for this period of time the determination of electricity consumption by a 
non-household  consumer  is  impossible  (in  case  of  damage  of  electricity  meter),  for 
unrecorded  consumption  of  electricity,  non-household  consumer  will  be  charged  with  the 
payment  equal  to  an  average  monthly  consumption  of  electricity  during  3  months  of 
consumption,  when  electricity  accounting  was  held  properly  (with  consideration  of 
operating regime and practicable load conditions of using utilities and seasonality). This is a 
one-time charge method and shall not exceed three months. This paragraph does not apply 
to an illegal consumption envisaged by these Rules.  
6. In case of illegal consumption of electricity by a non-household consumer:  
a)  when  it  is  impossible  to  define  the  amount    of  illegal  consumed  electricity  within  a 
calendar day, but the initial date of illegal consumption of electricity is known, the amount 
of  consumed  electricity  will  be  calculated  according  to  maximum  operating  power  during 
violation  period,  with  consideration  of  operating  regime  and  practicable  load  conditions  of 
using utilities and seasonality.  
b) when it is impossible to define the initial date of illegal consumption of electricity and the 
amount  of  illegal  consumed  electricity  within  a  calendar  day,  the  amount    of  consumed 
electricity  will  be  calculated  according  to  maximum  operating  power  within  one  month 
period,  based  on  operating  regime  and  practicable  load  conditions  of  using  utilities  (with 
39 
 
consideration of seasonality). The amount of electricity charged by this method shall not be 
less than average monthly amount of electricity consumption by this consumer in a proper 
accounting period.  
c) Maximum operating power shall be measured in conditions of maximum consumption of a 
normal  process  cycle  or  by  summarizing  of  installed  capacities  of  electrical  installations  in 
working condition.  
7. The authorized representative of the Distribution licensee is responsible for the restoration 
of electricity supply.  
 
Article 31 
Reporting 
1. The Distribution licensee is obliged to account separately:  
a) The income, received from the payment of connecting a new consumer to the distribution 
network;  
b)  cost  of  all  works  and  services  related  to  connecting  a  new  consumer  to  the  distribution 
network, as well as, newly created property (with indication of financial and technical data 
and  parameters),  in  accordance  with  new  consumers  separately  (voltage  and  requested 
capacity) and consolidated;  
c)  Amount  of  distributed  and  passed  through  electricity  due  to  the  connection  of  a  new 
consumers to the distribution network and incomes and expenses connected with them.  
2. The Distribution licensee is obliged to submit to the Commission Financial Report and also 
separate  Financial  and  Technical  Report  requested  by  the  given  Article  that  shall  be 
confirmed  with  audit  report  until  April  1  of  each  year.  Also,  every  three  months  the 
Distribution  licensee  shall  present  to  the  Commission  operative  data  on  implementation 
works for connecting new consumers to the distribution network.  
3.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged  to  present  to  the  Commission  Unified  register  of 
supply  and  service  for  a  past  period  (in  accordance  with  the  form  developed  by  the 
Commission), in a time-frame of one week from the end of every three months (quarter). In 
case of electronic form, under these Rules, Unified register of electricity supply and service 
shall be presented to the Commission until the end of every month (in accordance with the 
form developed by the Commission, which must be confirmed by the Distribution licensee 
and its electronic version). 
Article 32 
Transitional Provisions 
1.  The  Distribution  licensee  is  obliged,  in  the  time-frame  of  one  month,  after  these  Rules 
enter into force to adjust all agreements in accordance with these Rules.  
40 
 
2.  For  the  purposes  of  these  Rules,  scheduled  inspection  period  for  individual  electricity 
meters,  which  were  installed  before  these  Rules  entered  into  force,  will  be  determined  by 
passport data-recordings  of corresponding electricity meter.  
3.  If  the  consumer  possesses  high-voltage  transformer  and  metering  point    is  organized  on 
the  side  of  low-capacity,  the  payment,  before  organizing  the  metering  point  on  a  high-
voltage side, shall be executed through metering point  organized on the side of low-capacity 
(before  January  1  of  2009).  In  such  case,  losses  in  the  consumer’s  transformer  and  in  his 
transmission facilities shall be added to the amount of accounted electricity. Moreover, the 
Distribution licensees are obliged to provide shifting of metering point to a high-voltage side, 
on  the  segment  of  electricity  network,  where  the  high-voltage  transformer  is  in  the 
ownership of the consumer connected to a distribution network. 
4.  The  conditions  for  connecting  a  new  consumer  to  a  distribution  network,  envisaged  by 
these Rules, do not apply to the cases when agreement about connecting was signed between 
a  new  consumer  and  the  Distribution  licensee or  Technical  Conditions  about  connecting  a 
new consumer to his network, have been issued by distribution license-holder before these 
Rules enter into force. 
5. JSC “ENERGO-PRO GEORGIA” is obliged to provide installation of consumers’ individual 
metering systems (individual metering points), in accordance with these Rules and the plan 
adopted  by  the  Commission  (the  plan  represents  the  part  of  an  investment  program).  JSC 
“ENERGO-PRO GEORGIA” is  obliged in the time-frame of  three  months after  these  Rules 
enter  into  force  to  present  a  plan  of  arrangement  of  individual  metering  systems  to  the 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
ANNEX #1 
POWER PURCHASE AGREEMENT N ___ 
 
Title of electricity seller ____________________________; 
Representative of electricity seller ___________________________________; 
(Position, name, surname) 
 
Electricity buyer (consumer) __________________________________________;  
(Individual person/legal person) 
Address____________________________; Tel:____________________________;  
 
Identification number ___________________________________________________; 
(In case of legal person or Individual Entrepreneur or other legal entity) 
 
Electricity consumption price for buyer (consumer) _______ kilowatt-hour.  
(Only in case of purchasing electricity from low-capacity power plant) 
 
Date of electricity supply commencement ____________________________________;  
 
Address where electricity shall be supplied ______________________________________;  
Owner of a distribution network 
Title of Distribution Licensee _______________; Requested capacity_________________; 
Parties agreed to undertake obligation about providing mutual relations in compliance with 
Georgian legislation and “Electricity (Capacity) Supply and Consumption Rules”.  
 
Electricity buyer (consumer) is obliged to make settlement for consumed electricity:  
In  case  of  purchasing  of  electricity  from  a  low-capacity  power  plant  –  at  the  electricity 
consumption price, envisaged by the agreement.  
In case of purchasing of electricity from a distribution licensee – at the tariff approved by the 
Georgian National Energy and Water Supply Regulatory Commission.  
 
 
Electricity  buyer  (consumer)  is  obliged  to  purchase  and  consume  electricity  only  for 
_______________ (household or non-household) purposes.  
 
Seller is obliged to ensure safe, uninterrupted, reliable and high quality electricity supply, in 
accordance with the legislation, terms of license and responsibilities under the agreement.  
42 
 
 
Electricity buyer (consumer) is obliged to pay electricity price in time.  
 
Seller is obliged to require from electricity buyer (consumer) to cover cost of electricity after 
determining the payment term and reflecting the monthly payment in the bill.  
 
Signature of electricity buyer (consumer): ___________________________ 
Signature of electricity seller: _____________________“___“ _____________200_  
 
Remark: In case of non-household consumer, agreement can be attached with time schedule 
of annual, monthly, daily and hourly forecasts of electricity supply and consumption. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
 
ANNEX # 3 
Potential capacity for the consumer's receivers and hourly computing table of these 
capacities 
 
N 
Electricity Receiver  Working hours (Day and 
Monthly service hours 
Installed 
Night) 
capacity 
Summer 
time (April-
October) 
1 
Winter time 
(November-
March) 
2 
Summer 
time (April-
October) 
30 
Winter time 
(November-
March) 
60 
 
 
 
1 
Electric fryer:  
- Stationary  
- Portable  
3,0 
1,0 
2 
Water heater with 
tank  
2 
3 
60 
90 
2,0 
3 
Heater with 
flowing water  
Air conditioner 
“summer”  
1 
1 
30 
30 
5,0 
4 
2 
- 
60 
- 
1,0 
5 
Air conditioner 
“summer winter”  
Water pomp  
2 
2 
60 
60 
1,5 
6 
- 
- 
20 
20 
0,5 
7 
Washing machine 
- 
- 
10 
10 
1,0 
8 
Computer 
2 
2 
60 
60 
0,4 
9 
Electric radiator 
- 
4 
- 
120 
1,5 
10 
Electric boiling pan   0,1 
0,1 
3 
3 
1,0 
Electric iron  
0,1 
11 
0,1 
3 
3 
1,0 
Electric lighting  
4 
12 
6 
120 
180 
0,1 
 
13 
Fan 
2,0 
- 
60 
- 
0,05 
14 
Refrigerator  
6 
4 
180 
120 
0,13 
15 
TV 
4 
4 
120 
120 
0,1 
44 
 
Remark: If passport data of electricity passport is unknown, we can use installed capacity, 
which is shown in table. 
 
 
ANNEX #4 
Fee for the connection new consumer to the distribution network on the 0,220 kV, 0,380 kV 
and 6/10 kV voltage levels 
 
 
1.  Proposed  packages  for  calculating  of  Fee  for  the  connection  new  consumer  to  connect 
distribution network by 0,220 kV, 0,380 kV and 6/10 kV: 
a)  In  case  of  connecting  new  consumer  (to  start  the  electricity  supply  in  defined  time)  to 
distribution network in defined period of time: 
 
Voltage Levels 
Capacity, kW 
Connecting period to a 
Connection fee 
distribution network for 
for a new 
new consumer 
consumer, 
including VAT 
(Calendar day) 
GEL 
0.220 
1-10 
35 
400 
1-10 
35 
1200 
 
 
11-30 
40 
4700 
 
31-50 
40 
7000 
 
51-80 
45 
10500 
45 
 
81-100 
45 
12000 
 
 
101-125 
45 
14000 
 
126-200 
45 
21500 
 
201-320 
60 
33000 
0.380 
321-500 
60 
50500 
501-800 
90 
80000 
801-1000 
90 
100000 
 
 
 
 
1-500 
60 
48500 
 
 
501-1000 
90 
94000 
 
1001-1500 
90 
137000 
6.-10 
1501-2000 
90 
177000 
2001-3000 
90 
257500 
3001-5000 
90 
416000 
 
 
b) If connection of new consumer to distribution network take longer time than it is defined 
in these Rules (not to start the electricity supply in defined time), consumer will pay 50% of 
fee (according to the proposed packages).  
2. If construction of the network for requested connection to the distribution network does 
not  require  any  consent  or  authorization,  connecting  period  of  new  consumer  will  be  for 
0,220 kV and 0,380 kV voltage - 20 days, and for 6/10 kV voltage level - 40 days. Applicant 
46 
 
must  be  notified  about  this  information  along  with  notification  about  completeness  of  the 
application in written or electronic form.  
 
 
 
47 
 
