 
MAIN DIRECTIONS OF THE STATE 
POLICY IN ENERGY SECTOR OF 
GEORGIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
1.  OBJECTIVES OF THE ENERGY POLICY 
Main objective of the energy policy is to raise country’s energy security, which 
serves as a tool for ensuring national interests through uninterruptable supply of 
various energy products under acceptable quantity, quality and price. 
Development and implementation of energy policy is a fundamental prerequisite 
for achieving strategic goals set forth in the economic development and energy 
fields. 
This  Energy  Policy  for  Georgia  sets  out  strategic  directions      that  address  the 
priorities  and  development  opportunities  in  the  energy  sector  of  Georgia,  also 
considers main directions towards energy security.  
The  policy’s  intent  is  to  develop  a  long-term  comprehensive  state  vision,  which 
will later become the basis for the development of short, medium and long term 
strategies in the energy sector serving as the basis for  energy sector programs 
and further development of the regulatory legal basis of the sector.  
 
2. ENERGY POLICY DIRECTIONS 
The core national energy policy directions include: 
  Diversification  of  supply  sources,  optimal  utilization  of 
local 
resouces and reserves  
the  main  directions 
improving  national  energy  security,  one  of 
For 
is 
diversification  of  supply  sources  and  routes  for  oil,  natural  gas  and  electricity; 
efficient  utilization  of  local  energy  potential;  and  if    necessary,  creation  of 
strategic minimum reserves for oil and/or oil products. Despite the scarce natural 
gas, oil and coal reserves in Georgia, determined quantities still exist. However, 
vast majority of above-mentioned primary resources remains largely unexplored. 
Accordingly,  exploration  of  existing  reserves  and  rational  utilization  of  potential 
natural resources need to be fully supported. Local demand on electricity shall be 
satisfied    by  own  energy  resources,  through  replacing  imported  energy  carriers 
step by step..  
  Utilization of Georgia’s renewable energy resources 
Development  of  renewable  resources  is  a  key  to  tackling  climate  change  and 
deploying cleaner sources of energy. Georgia is remarkably rich in hydro-power 
resources,  also  having  potential  of  wind,  solar,  biomass  and  geothermal 
resources,  which  can  be  used  for  creation  of  additional  capacity  by  means  of 
domestic  and  foreign  investments.  To  achieve  this  goal,  it  is  vital  to  improve 
investment climate through creation of stable, transparent and non-discriminatory 
legal  basis;  through  deepening  strong  and  stable 
trading  relations  with 
neighboring  countries’  energy  markets;  through  development  of  corresponding 
domestic  and  cross-border  infrastructure;  also,  through  support  of    scientific-
research (R&D)activities All of the above will decrease dependence on imported 
energy carriers and increase country’s energy security level.  
2 
 
 
  Gradual  approximation  of  Georgia’s 
framework with the EU’s Energy acquis   
legislative  and 
regulatory 
With  the  aim  of  achieving  deeper  economic  and  political  relations,  gradual 
approximation  of  Georgian  legislation  with  the  EU  legislation  is  important.  The 
above process will facilitate: competitive, transparent and effective energy market 
model  as  well  as  creation  of  attractive  and  stable 
investment  climate; 
development  of  energy  trade  between  Georgia  and  EU  countries;  utilization  of 
renewable  energy  resources  and  facilitation  of  energy  efficiency  oriented 
activities in the country through economically and ecologically feasible means.  
 
With  the  aim  of  gradual  approximation  with  EU  legislation,  it’s  important  that 
consumers, that have metering points acceptable by existing standards, have an 
opportunity  to  purchase  electricity  from  any  supplier.    Thus,  starting  from  year 
2017, consumers shall have right to become direct consumers, if they satisfy the 
requirements  set  by  relevant  “Grid  Codes”  and  “  Electricity  (capacity)  Market 
Rules”. 
 
  energy  market  development  and  improvement  of  energy  trading 
mechanism 
Competitive  market  activities  represent  the  most  effective  instrument  for 
optimization of supply and demand for natural gas and electricity, which can be 
achieved  through  competitive  market  conditions.  For  gradual  establishment  of 
competitive  energy  market  and  development  of  trading  relations,  the  following 
steps are vital: deepening legal and trading relations; establishment of strong and 
transparent  institutions;  improving  regulatory  legal  basis;further  development  of 
gradual  deregulation  and  technical  synchronization  of  Georgia’s  energy  system 
with the regional energy systems.  
  Strengthen Georgia’s role as a transit route in the region 
Georgia  is  an  important  transit  country.  Georgia  as    a  connecting  corridor 
between Europe and Asia, has a potential to strengthen its role in implementation 
of    East-West  and  North-South  transit  projects.  Effective  utilization  of  its 
geopolitical  location,  will  contribute  to    country’s  energy  security  and  economic 
development.  
  Georgia – regional platform for generation and trade of clean energy  
Georgia’s  wealth  in  existing  hydro-resources,  corresponding  infrastructure  and 
favorable  investment  climate  enable  the  country  to  establish  itself as  a  regional 
platform for the generation and trading of clean energy.  
To  achieve  this  goal,  it  is  vital  to  continue  working  on  further  improvement  of  
legal framework as well as scientific-research and infrastructure development, to 
3 
 
 
facilitate  utilization  of  Georgia’s  existing  clean  energy  potential  and  enable  the 
country to become a regional platform for clean energy trading . 
  Develop and implement an integrated approach to energy efficiency 
in Georgia 
Energy  intensity  is  a  key  measure  of  the  country’s  economic  strength  and  an 
important  component  of  a  generated  product’s  competitiveness.  The  above 
indicator for  Georgia  remains  higher  than  the  indicators  of  not  just  EU  member 
states,  but also  other developed countries. Decreasing energy intensity through 
various  measures  of  demand-side  management  (DSM)  will  be  a  prerequisite  to 
economic growth, improvement of social conditions and further development. 
Adequate  DSM  measures  for  energy  generation,  transmission-distribution    and 
consumption  as  well  as  energy  efficiency  programs,  play  an  important  role  in 
optimizing  country’s  energy  consumption  dynamics.  To  facilitate  the  DSM,  an 
according  legislative  framework  needs  to  be  created;  activities  oriented  on  i 
development  and  establishment  of  energy  efficient  technologies  and  equipment 
must  be  planned  and  implemented;  for  energy  producers  and  consumers 
incentivizing regulation must be created and established for realization of energy 
efficiency programs.   
 
  Taking 
into  consideration  environmental  components 
in 
the 
implementation of the  energy projects  
 
While  implementing  energy  projects  including  implementation  of  large  HPP 
projects,  that  might  have  an  environmental  and  social  impact,  ,  it’s  vital  to  take 
into  consideration  best  international  practices,  which  include  environmental  and 
social  impact  assessment,  consultations  with  local  population,  information 
publicity and availability.  
 
 
Improving service quality and protection of consumer interests 
Another important  direction  of  the  energy  policy  is improving  the  service  quality 
(development/rehabilitation  of  transmission  and  distribution  infrastructure  and 
finalization  of  individual  metering)  and  protecting  the  consumer  interests.  In  the 
natural  gas  and  electricity  sectors  a  significant  share  is  held  by  natural 
monopolies. Therefore, it is of particular importance to strengthen the regulatory 
function  of  regulatory  bodies,  which  through  consideration  of  bilateral  interests 
with  fair  approach  ensures  the  monitoring  of  service  quality  and  regulation  of 
relations between service providers and the consumers. With this purpose, new 
standards  for    service  quality  must  be  determined  and  the  criteria  for  their 
evaluation and fair rules for service quality monitoring must be determined by the 
regulatory  authoity.  
4 
 
 
For  effective  functioning  of  the  energy  markets,  transparent  and fair  tariff  levels 
must be determined. Fair tariffs must on the one hand allow the producer to fully 
compensate      the  costs  related  to  service  provision,  and  on  the  other  hand, 
protect  the  consumer  to  receive  high  standard  services  at  transparent  and  fair 
costs. The government led social programs and targeted subsidies must ensure 
uninterrupted  supply  of  energy  to  vulnerable  population.  In  addition  long  term, 
fixed  tariffs  (including    cap  tariffs)  may  be  considered  for  various  types  of 
technically  sustainable 
long 
consumers, 
development of energy system. 
financially  and 
to  ensure 
term, 
 
 
5 
 
