Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
I.   UNDP  within 
the  United  Nations 
Sustainable  Development 
Cooperation Framework 
1.  The gross domestic product (GDP) of Kenya grew at an average annual rate of 5.6 per cent 
between 2013 and 2019, below its Vision 2030 target of 10 per cent. GDP per capita has steadily 
increased,  reaching  $1,816.50  in  2019.  The  attainment  of  middle-income  status  saw  monetary 
poverty rates decline to 36.1 per cent in 2015-2016, but absolute numbers of poor have increased, 
driven  mainly  by  population  growth.  While  government  spending  has  stimulated  growth, 
sustainability is not secured; debt levels increased to over 70 per cent of GDP in 2021.  
2.  Kenya has made progress in implementing1 the Sustainable Development Goals, ranking 118th 
out of 165 globally and in the top 10 best-performing countries in sub-Saharan Africa. Out of the 
14 Sustainable Development Goals whose data was collectable, six2 are moderately improving and 
one, Goal 13, on track, while the remaining seven are either stagnating or decreasing.  
3.  Kenya  is  recognized  as  an  innovation  hub,  ranking  7th  in  Africa  on  the  Global  Innovation 
Index, 2021, and 82nd globally, with an increasing number of innovation technical hubs across the 
country,3 increased broadband connectivity, and increased investment in decentralization and local 
development  of  technical  capacity.  Over  the  past  decade,  Kenya  has  seen  more  start-ups  and 
businesses registered, due to strong demand for innovative products and services. In 2021, despite 
the ongoing pandemic, an increase of 38.7 per cent was recorded.4  
4.  Micro, small and medium-sized enterprises play a critical role in economic development and 
employment  creation.  Over  7.4  million  of  them  employ  approximately  14.9  million  Kenyans, 
contributing approximately 40 per cent of GDP and providing an engine for inclusive economic 
growth. However, they remain largely informal and vulnerable to economic and climate shocks, 
lacking access to the economic and financial opportunities associated with formalization.  
5.  The  2020  Human  Development  Index  was  0.601,  putting  Kenya  in  the  medium  human 
development category, ranking 143rd out of 189 countries. While Kenya has been more successful 
in  boosting  shared  prosperity  than  its  regional  peers,  it  continues  to  suffer  from  inequality  of 
opportunity, with rural populations in the poorest counties lagging behind in development.5 Its Gini 
index  improved  from  0.45  in  2005-2006  to  0.39  in  2015-2016.6  Multidimensional  poverty 
diminishes with age; youth and children are the most affected, accounting for 73 per cent of the 
poor.7  
6. 
Implementation of a fully democratic political system under  a transformative constitution is 
well  under  way, but  challenges  of  peace  and  security  remain,  with  implications  for  sustainable 
development.  Regional  instability,  violent  extremism,  conflicts  over  natural  resources,  ethnic 
polarization,  corruption  and  social  discrimination  are  outlined  as  key  drivers  that  tend  to  be 
aggravated during election years.8 Although Kenya was recently classified as a hybrid democracy 
(irregularities in elections prevent them from being free and fair)9, the 2020 Mo Ibrahim Index on 
African Governance ranked Kenya 14th out of 54 countries, with an overall score of 58.5/100 and 
a 3.7-point improvement over the 2010-2019 period. Human mobility represents a challenge for 
peace and security, but also opportunities for economic growth and connecting societies.10 Kenya 
 
1 Africa SDG Index and Dashboards Report 2020  
2 Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3 , 5 , 7 , 8 and 9 
3 Groupe Spéciale Mobile Association, 2019 report 
4 Business Daily, September 2021 
5 World Bank, 2020. Systematic Country Diagnostic Kenya 
6Ibid.  
7 Comprehensive Poverty Report 2020, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics 
8 Building Bridges to a United Kenya: from a nation of blood ties to a nation of ideals, 2019, Presidential Task Force on Building 
Bridges to Unity Advisory and Kenya @ 10; A Decade After: The State Of Human Rights Post the 2010 Promulgation of 
the Constitution: A Human Rights Scorecard, 2020, Kenya National Commission on Human Rights  
9Economist Intelligence Unit Democracy Index 2020 
10 Global report on internal displacement, 2020  
22-05799 
2/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
hosts 1.05 million international migrants, almost half of them refugees and asylum seekers. Kenyan 
emigrants were estimated at 535,348 in 2020, contributing remittances worth 3.1 per cent of GDP. 
7.  The  Kenya  Constitution  provides  a  framework  for  democratic  governance  considered  a 
progressive  ‘People’s  Constitution’,  based  on  the  premise  that  sovereign  power  belongs  to  the 
people, who have a critical role to play in the delegated exercise of power with women’s political 
leadership. Kenya devolved substantial powers from the Government to 47 county governments, 
including a minimum allocation of 15 per cent of the national budget, in addition to conditional 
grants that supplemented local taxes. In 2020, Kenya was ranked 124th out of 180 countries on the 
Corruption  Perceptions  Index.  Kenyans  have  nevertheless  embraced  the  devolved  system, 
including county governments as centres of service delivery.11  
8. 
 Kenya has rich biodiversity, made up of undulating landscapes, coastal seascapes, marine life, 
beaches,  mangrove  forests,  and  water  resources.  Challenges  associated  with  climate  change, 
population  growth  and  rapid  urbanization  led  to  the  decline  of  its  megafauna,  biodiversity  and 
forest  cover.12  Efforts  are  under  way  to  reverse  deforestation  and  improve  tree  cover  to  the 
constitutional 10 per cent target, with an outcome document13 for county-level climate action to 
accelerate mitigation and adaptation measures.  
9.  Climate change remains a major threat, with growing economic costs estimated at 2.6 per cent 
of  GDP.14  Kenya  committed  to  climate  actions  through  an  updated  nationally  determined 
contribution aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 32 per cent by 2030, from the present 
143  metric  tons  of  carbon  dioxide  equivalent.  The  total  cost  of  implementing  mitigation  and 
adaptation actions is estimated at $62 billion, of which Kenya has committed 13 per cent. Kenya 
has achieved 93 per cent of the renewable energy contribution to the electricity grid, and is expected 
to reach a clean grid by 2030 and a 2.79 per cent reduction in total energy intensity annually by 
2030 from the baseline year, 2012.15   
10.  The  impact  of  COVID-19  has  seen  increased  poverty  among  up  to  2  million  people  and 
increased  gender  inequality  through  loss  of  income  and  gender-based  violence.  During  2020, 
1.7 million jobs were lost in the formal sector and 5 million in the informal sector.16 The pandemic 
increased poverty by 4 per cent through income loss and other socioeconomic impacts. The poverty 
incidence among women tends to be higher due to minimal employment opportunities in the formal 
sector,  among  other  factors.17  UNDP  led  the  development  of  the  United  Nations  system-wide 
socio-economic  recovery  plan  and  COVID-19  socioeconomic  reengineering  and  recovery 
strategies for national and county-level governments  
11.  The  Kenya  Constitution  promotes  a  youth-centric  approach,  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment. This acknowledges 75 per cent of the population below the age of 35 years and 
51 per cent females among 47.6 million people.18 While progress has been made in empowering 
women and youth, as well as people with disabilities, these groups remain largely marginalized. 
The unemployment rate for youth aged 15-24 years is five times the national unemployment rate 
of 7.4 per cent, with an estimated future increase due to more than 800,000 youth entering the job 
market annually. The exclusion of women and youth in leadership, economic empowerment and 
decision-making  spaces  has  continued,  resulting  in  41  per  cent  of  women  being  vulnerable  to 
sexual and gender-based violence and 29 per cent of children in rural areas being affected by child 
marriages.19 
 
11 What do Kenyans Know About Devolution? Survey evidence on political knowledge and public opinion, Ken Ochieng’ Opalo, 
Georgetown University, June 2020  
12 Kenya State of Environment Report, 2019-2021  
13 The Seventh and Final Annual Devolution Conference, November 2021 
14 Diwakar and Shepherd, (2018); Overseas Development Institute, (2020).  
15 Sustainable Energy for All, 2016  
16 Kenya National Bureau of Statistics and Federation of Kenyan Employers, 2020 
17 Kenya integrated household budgetary survey, 2018 
18 Kenya population and housing census, 2019 
19 Kenya demographic and health survey, 2014 
22-05799 
3/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
12.  Vision  2030  aims  to  transform  Kenya  into  a  newly  industrializing,  middle-income  country 
providing a high quality of life and a clean and secure environment for all citizens. Central to the 
vision  is  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development,  considered  to  have  a  transformative 
impact for the people of Kenya and being implemented through five-year medium-term plans. The 
current plan, ‘MTP-III’ (2018-2022), is under review with support from UNDP in preparation for 
‘MTP-IV’  (2023-2027)  formulation.  Kenya  has  adopted  a  whole-of-government  and  whole-of-
society  approach  towards  implementing  Sustainable  Development  Goals,  where  its  planning 
frameworks, including the medium-term plans, county integrated development plans and other key 
strategic plans, are consistent with the 2030 Agenda. 
13.  The  United  Nations  Sustainable  Cooperation  Framework,  2022-2026,  articulates  the 
United Nations contribution  to the  achievement of  Sustainable Development Goals. The  UNDP 
contribution  is  supported  by  the  recommendations  of  the  independent  country  programme 
evaluation20 and based on its comparative advantage and integrator role:  First, UNDP brings its 
global  mandate  as  a  lead  development  entity  through  signature  and  integrated  development 
solutions,  and  its  repositioned  offer  for  Africa.  Second,  UNDP  builds  on  lessons  learned  and 
development results achieved during the previous country programme. Third, UNDP leverages its 
global  policy  network  to  provide  specialized  advice,  taking  into  account  the  unique  context  of 
Kenya  as the only  country  in the global South  hosting United Nations headquarters offices and 
where UNDP boasts global, regional, country and United Nations Volunteers21 presence. Fourth, 
UNDP will continue to be the platform for mainstreaming, acceleration and policy support on the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals.  Its  development  effectiveness  cooperation  and  recovery 
programme  will  serve  as  an  ‘integrator  programme’,  supporting  Goals  policy  coherence  and 
planning,  financing,  capacity  strengthening  for  data,  and  multi-stakeholder  coordination.  The 
accelerator lab would be utilized to drive entrepreneurship and innovation to address the complex 
youth unemployment challenge, thereby reinforcing the integrator role of UNDP.  
 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
 
14.  The  country  programme  is  aligned  with  national  development  and  recovery  priorities  and 
follows extensive consultations with key partners. 22 It is guided by the Cooperation Framework, 
the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025,23 the UNDP gender strategy, 2022-2025, the UNDP energy 
compact, the UNDP ‘people 2030’ strategy, and commitment to focus on youth, the principles of 
gender equality, and leaving no one behind, as identified in the common country analysis, 2021. 
 
15.  The  vision of  the  country  programme  is to  leverage partnerships to safeguard development 
gains  by  building  resilience  and  accelerating  recovery  for  the  achievement  of  the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  through  Vision  2030,  to  address  root  causes  hampering  sustainable 
development. This will be realized through a youth- and gender-centric lens, including people with 
disabilities, those living with HIV, and borderlands24 communities. This approach is focused on 
three interrelated development areas: to leave no one behind through (a) governance, peace and 
social  cohesion;  (b)  sustainable,  inclusive  green  growth;  and  (c)  nature-based  solutions  and 
resilience. Programme efficiency will be enhanced by  implementing an updated partnership and 
communication action plan that diversifies the funding mix25 as recommended by the independent 
country  programme  evaluation  and  various  project  evaluation  findings  which  articulate  the 
comparative  advantage  of  UNDP  over  other  partners.  The  theory  of  change  is  based  on  the 
 
20 Independent country programme evaluation, 2021U 
21 United Nations Volunteers are supporting devolution, peace and security, the COVID-19 response, and coordination of 
United Nations programming. 
22 Consultations held with Government, civil society, private sector, academia and the UNDP Youth Sounding Board 
23 The three development settings are: (a) structural transformation accelerated – green, inclusive and digital transitions; (b) no 
one left behind, centred on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach; and (c) resilience built to respond to 
systemic uncertainty and risk, integrating the six ‘signature solutions’. 
24 Borderlands are the territorial margins of nation-states – regions where border contact is a central feature of economic, 
social and political life, creating opportunities for acceleration of implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.  
25 Elaborated in the country programme document resource mobilization table 
22-05799 
4/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
expectation that if economic growth becomes sustainable and green and society is inclusive and 
peaceful 
innovation  and 
multi-stakeholder partnerships with access to quality services, then  people will be resilient and 
fulfilled, and achieve their full human potential.  
through  an  enabling  environment 
takes  advantage  of 
that 
16.  UNDP is strategically positioned to offer high-level policy advice, institutional strengthening, 
programme support and strategic partnerships to implement, report on and monitor the Sustainable 
Development Goals and enhance institutional coordination mechanisms. Building on its technical 
leadership role in the integrated national financing framework, UNDP will support the discourse 
on Goals financing and the formulation process of ‘MTP-IV’. UNDP will continue working with 
partners  and,  most  notably,  its  pioneering  Youth  Sounding  Board,  to  design  interventions  that 
integrate volunteerism and innovation to tackle the challenges of governance, resilience and service 
delivery. 
Governance, peace and social cohesion 
17.  Governance,  peace  and  social  cohesion  are  foundations  for  sustainable  development. 
COVID-19 has reinforced the notion that revitalizing the social contract by rethinking the process 
by which state and citizens interact to design and implement policies for the management of public 
affairs, is not only a pathway to achieving and sustaining peace, but also the resilience of nations, 
societies  and  communities.  The  attention  to  governance,  peace  and  social  cohesion  under  this 
country programme is based on the independent country programme evaluation recommendations 
and is aligned with the transformative vision of the Kenya Constitution.  
18.  As the United Nations entity with principal responsibility for governance and peacebuilding, 
UNDP  strategic  interventions  will  embrace  a  whole-of-government  and  whole-of-society 
approach, working with legislative, executive, and judicial institutions at national and county levels 
while leveraging the skills, capacities, networks, and resources of civil society, the private sector, 
media,  academia,  local  community  associations  –particularly  youth  and  women’s  groups  –  to 
monitor, conduct oversight, and raise awareness of the work. To achieve transformative results in 
the  areas  of  accountability  and  transparency,  special  attention  will  be  paid  to  promoting  open 
government and rule of law; upholding human rights; strengthening public participation; enhancing 
planning and budgeting; and strengthening partnerships with key oversight institutions26 at national 
and county levels.  
19.  UNDP  will  continue  supporting  non-state  actors  and  rights-holders,  contributing  to 
transparency, accountability, access to justice, and the promotion and protection of human rights, 
particularly for people with disabilities, people living with HIV27 and other key populations. To 
support  transformational  leadership  and  change,  sustaining  a  revitalized  social  contract,  UNDP 
will  continue  to  develop  leadership  capacities  enabling  state  and  non-state  actors  to  scale  up 
successful  initiatives,  innovate,  and  collaborate  effectively  to  promote  gender-equitable  social 
norms free of stigma and discrimination. 
20.  To  address  vulnerability  to  violent  conflict,  driven  by  competition  over  natural  resources, 
climate  change,  marginalization,  violent  extremism,  ethno-political  competition,  poverty  and 
inequality, UNDP, through its regional programmes and partners in the peace, conflict prevention 
and  security  sector,  will  intervene  through  gender-sensitized  legal  and  policy  dialogue  and 
advocacy, institutional development and capacity  development, peace innovation platforms and 
early warning response systems, including leveraging the UNDP African Borderlands Centre. 
21.  UNDP will continue to support the strengthening of local democracy, local governance and 
peace capacities, in line with the national policy on devolved functions and public service reforms 
to  increase  effectiveness  accountability,  inclusion,  resilience,  core  government  functions,  and 
 
26 Kenya National Commission on Human Rights; Ethics and Anticorruption Commission; National Gender and Equality 
Commission; Office of the Auditor General; Commission on Administrative Justice; Commission on Revenue Allocation; Office 
of the Controller of Budget 
27 Global AIDS Strategy, 2021-2026, and UNDP HIV and health strategy 2022-2025  
22-05799 
5/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
delivery of basic public services to meet citizen expectations. UNDP will harness digitalization to 
support development interventions that are inclusive, effective, and transformative. 
Sustainable, inclusive, green growth 
22.  Inclusive green growth is a pathway to attaining sustainable development. Kenya has made 
great strides on poverty, but these have damaged the environment and increased social inequality. 
The real costs of resource depletion have yet to be established for commensurate reinvestment. The 
development  gains  made  thus  far  are  under  threat,  and  long-term  economic  growth  will  not  be 
sustainable. One of the  major priorities of the  National Youth Development Policy, 2019, is to 
promote  mechanisms  that  support  youth  engagement  in  developing,  protecting,  and  conserving 
natural resources and the environment while fostering eco-entrepreneurship and green jobs. 
 
23.  UNDP will support inclusive green growth policies to maximize benefits to  youth, women, 
people with disabilities and the most vulnerable by mobilizing and building capacities to establish 
and strengthen viable business and entrepreneurship models in key productive value chains28 to 
create  employment  and  sustainable  livelihoods.  The  enablers  for  inclusive  green  growth  are: 
political  will;  innovations  and  smart  solutions;  and  alternative  finance.  Strategies  adopted  will 
strengthen  national  policy  frameworks  and  data  systems,  integrate  development  financing 
frameworks, and develop youth, women and  micro, small and medium-sized enterprises to take 
advantage of the available tools for green growth strategies.  
 
24.  UNDP  will  support  activities  that  encourage  green  investments  and  those  that  incentivize 
smart decision-making and innovative financing to tackle the increasing needs in light of dwindling 
domestic  resources  and  limited  fiscal  space.  In  partnership  with  Government,  businesses  and 
investors,  UNDP  will  promote  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  investor  maps  to  provide 
potential  investors  with  market  intelligence  and  enhance  opportunities  for  South-South  and 
triangular exchange.29 This will enable the dissemination and utilization of scalable and bankable 
business models in productive sectors, targeting youth, women and entrepreneurs with disabilities. 
UNDP will collaborate with the Regional Service Centre and the African Continental Free Trade 
Area secretariat to open up additional opportunities, especially for women and youth. 
Nature-based solutions and resilience 
25.  Kenya faces pressing environmental challenges, including climate  change, natural resource 
depletion, loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services, and climate security risks. While climate 
change does not itself cause conflict, there is a need to address climate change and environmental 
degradation  as  risk  multipliers,  and  to  promote  and  safeguard  the  state  of  the  environment  for 
sustainable economic growth. The focus on nature-based solutions and resilience seeks to actualize 
the  constitutional  recognition  of  sustainable  development  and  the  right  to  a  clean  and  healthy 
environment  for  all  citizens,  leaving  no  one  behind,  particularly  the  most  vulnerable  –  youth, 
women and people with disabilities. This is anchored in a robust set of international environmental 
governance and multilateral environmental instruments ratified by Kenya. 
26.   UNDP will continue to work with partners to support national and county governments to 
accelerate  implementation  of  legal,  policy  and  institutional  frameworks  for  sustainable 
management of the environment and natural resources. To mitigate environmental degradation and 
loss of biodiversity, and build community resilience, UNDP will scale up the sustainable use and 
management of natural resources to reduce deforestation; enhance catchment and land restoration; 
scale up sound waste management; advance sustainable blue economy initiatives; promote tourism; 
and scale up climate mitigation and adaptation measures to leverage innovation, digitization and 
development financing. Emphasis will be placed on youth-centric and gendered, conflict-sensitive 
use of natural resources for accountable, social, and economic development. 
27.   UNDP will support the development of robust policy and institutional frameworks to guide 
implementation of the  nationally determined contribution, 2020; the land degradation neutrality 
 
28 Tourism, forestry, agroforestry, manufacturing, information and communication technologies 
29 UNDP, in consultation with Government departments, will strengthen networks and knowledge exchanges, peer learning on 
middle-income countries, and coordination through South-South cooperation. 
22-05799 
6/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
targets; and the climate change action plans and strategies anticipating the adoption of an inspiring 
long-term strategy towards net zero carbon emissions. To address the widening energy gap, UNDP 
will  support  initiatives  to  improve  access  to  renewable  energy  technologies  for  productive  use. 
These  will  be  supported  by  the  development  of  mini-grids  and  associated  productive  uses  of 
electricity in areas where energy poverty and scarcity of economic opportunities are salient.  The 
country demonstrates substantial scope for decentralized renewable energy generation to provide 
universal energy access among rural populations.30 
28.  On disaster risk-informed development, UNDP will support the overall government strategy 
for  reducing  and  managing  climate  and  disaster  risks  and  impacts.  UNDP  will  focus  on 
strengthening  disaster  risk  governance/policy,  legal  and  institutional  frameworks;  establishing 
mechanisms to assess and monitor disaster risks and impacts; improving access to and use of risk 
information;  strengthening  preparedness  and  early  warning  systems;  exploring  risk  insurance 
options; and mainstreaming disaster risk reduction  into development plans and budgets. UNDP 
will  strengthen  post-disaster  recovery  through  a  ‘build  forward  better’  approach  to  enhance 
community resilience to future shocks and crises. In supporting disaster risk management, UNDP 
will partner with national and subnational institutions.31 
 
III.  Programme and risk management  
29.  This  country  programme  outlines UNDP contributions to national results and serves as the 
primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned 
to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and 
headquarters  levels  with  respect  to  country  programmes  are  prescribed  in  the  programme  and 
operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. 
30.  The programme will be nationally executed. To mitigate risks in project management, UNDP 
will  strengthen  capacities  internally  and  prioritize  related  accountability  and  training  for 
implementing partners. If necessary, national execution may be replaced by direct execution for 
part or all of the programme to enable response to force majeure. The Harmonized Approach to 
Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other United Nations organizations to 
manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and  classifications  for  programme  and  development 
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. 
31.  To mitigate any social or environmental risks, UNDP will apply its standards, accountability 
mechanisms and agility in its programme management. UNDP will seek to better anticipate shocks 
and promote resilience through early-warning systems, collaboration with key stakeholders, and 
targeted  risk  and  gender-sensitive  analysis.  These  will  be  integrated  into  the  formulation  and 
implementation of all projects, including leveraging tools such as the gender marker to track gender 
and women’s empowerment; the crisis risk dashboard to monitor and mitigate risk; and the ongoing 
process of Gender Seal certification.  
32.  Kenya  will  hold  general  elections  in  August  2022,  which  could  delay  programme 
implementation  and  threaten  development  gains.  UNDP  will  continue  investing  to  better  equip 
national stakeholders with inclusive, innovative and gender-sensitive tools to inform and support 
early-warning  systems  and  prevention  responses  before,  during  and  after  the  electoral  period. 
UNDP will continue to support democracy and human rights by leveraging past engagement with 
non-state  actors  and  the  diverse  media  and  social  media  landscape,  which  is  a  key  channel  for 
public debate on issues of governance, transparency and accountability.  
33.  In  line  with  recommendations  from  the  2021  Management  Audit32  and  the  independent 
country programme evaluation, risks related to resource mobilization will be managed through a 
 
30 Magda Moner-Girona, Katalin Bódis, James Morrissey, Ioannis Kougias, Mark Hankins, Thomas Huld, Sándor Szabó, 
Decentralized rural electrification in Kenya: Speeding up universal energy access, Energy for Sustainable Development, 
Volume 52, 2019, pp 128-146  
31 National Treasury and Planning, National Drought Management Authority, and National Disaster Operation Centre 
32 Office of Audit and Investigations, 2021 
22-05799 
7/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
realistic  programming  approach  based  on  resource  availability  and  a  robust  partnership  and 
resource mobilization strategy. UNDP will make use of regional and global assets and collaborate 
with  the  Government  on  joint  resource  mobilization  efforts,  including  government  cost-sharing 
and working with the private sector to maximize benefits for targeted groups. The award winning 
‘CO-RESET’33 framework of the country office will guide integrated programming and operational 
efforts.  
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
 
34.  UNDP has been working with the Monitoring and Evaluation Directorate under the National 
Treasury  and  Planning  to  enhance  availability  and  utility  of  data  for  evidence-based  policy 
formulation,  implementation  and  reporting  at  the  national  and  county  levels.  Kenya  has  been 
consistent in voluntary national reporting on Sustainable Development Goals, which has cascaded 
to  counties  and  continues  to  be  a  valuable  source  of  data  for  tracking  the  Goals.  UNDP  will 
continue  to  support  initiatives  to  augment  data  verification  and  validation,  including  annual 
performance reviews at project, programme and United Nations levels. 
 
35.  UNDP will place greater emphasis on results monitoring and reporting. At least 7 per cent of 
programme resources will be allocated to monitoring and evaluation. UNDP will support capacity 
enhancement for staff, government,  civil society  organizations and national partners on results-
based  management.  To  strengthen  outcome-level  monitoring,  evaluation  and  reporting,  project 
outputs and outcomes will be appropriately linked to  country programme outcomes. UNDP will 
strengthen monitoring and evaluation coordination structures internally and externally to support 
better data collection, data verification, results monitoring and reporting. 
 
36.  The  resources  will  be  utilized  to  strengthen  national  and  county-level  monitoring  and 
evaluation activities, including strengthening national data sources, establishing baseline data, joint 
programmatic  visits,  and  capacity  development.  Documentation  and  dissemination  of  lessons 
learned  and  success  stories  will  be  undertaken  regularly  to  inform  programming  and  capacity 
support to national and subnational institutions. UNDP will monitor the implementation of a costed 
and approved evaluation plan for this country programme, which will be reviewed periodically to 
reinforce accountability, learning, and agility in decision-making  
 
37.  Joint  programming  with  other  United  Nations  organizations  will  be  prioritized  through 
enhanced  standard  operating  procedures.  To  strengthen  data  collection  and  verification,  UNDP 
will conduct annual outcome-level performance reviews with government and national partners 
and  use  the  data  to  inform  policy  advice,  advocacy  and  strategic  decisions  to  strengthen 
accountability and transparency in the public domain. 
 
 
 
33 The CO-RESET (CPD roll-out; Organizational excellence; Resource mobilization; Efficiency in business processes; Staff 
well-being; Engagement; and Talent management) is a home-grown performance and accountability mechanism for more 
effective systems and structures. 
22-05799 
8/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Kenya (2022–2026) 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: A democratic political system that is issues-based , people-centred, results-oriented and accountable to the public 
1.1. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 1. By 2026, people in Kenya at risk of being left behind – particularly in the arid and 
semi-arid lands (ASAL) counties, informal urban settlements, all women and girls, all children and youth – inhabit an inclusive, enabling, socially cohesive, and peaceful society where 
human rights are upheld, benefit from accountable institutions, participate in transformative governance systems that are gender-responsive, and uphold the rule of law. 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 5, 10, 11, 16 and 17 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. No one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines, 
targets) 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S) 
DATA SOURCE AND FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
MAJOR PARTNERS/ 
PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 
ESTIMATED COST BY 
OUTCOME ($) 
Proportion of the population who have 
experienced a dispute in the past two 
years and accessed a formal or informal 
dispute resolution mechanism, by type 
of mechanism 
Baseline 2022: To be confirmed (TBC)  
Target 2026: TBC  
Frequency: Annual 
Data source: National Steering Committee on 
Peacebuilding and Conflict Management 
(NSC), National Cohesion and Integration 
Commission (NCIC)  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: Ministry of Interior, National 
Coordination (MOINC) 
Output 1.1. Democratic systems and 
space for inclusive participation and 
social cohesion towards peace and 
security are enhanced. 
Regular: $2.2 million 
Ministry of Devolution (MOD) 
Ministry of Gender and Public 
Affairs 
Parliament 
Judiciary 
Office of the Attorney General 
Council of Governors 
County Assemblies Forum (CAF) 
Kenya National Commission on 
Human Rights 
Independent Electoral and 
Boundaries Commission  
National AIDS Control Council 
Kenya School of Government 
County governments 
Civil society 
UN-Women 
United Nations Children’s Fund 
Office of the High Commissioner 
on Human Rights 
United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime 
United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural 
Organization 
United Nations Capital 
Development Fund (UNCDF) 
Intergovernmental Authority on 
Development 
European Union 
Sweden 
Germany 
Other: $37.8 million 
 
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of peace, 
social cohesion, preventing and 
countering violent extremism, and 
human security plans, policies and legal 
frameworks enacted and implemented   
Baseline : 5 (2021) 
Target :10 (2026)  
Data source: NSC, NCIC, Kenya 
National Action Plan, NCTC, Uwiano 
Platform for Peace  
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Number of 
mechanisms supported for dialogue, 
consensus-building, reconciliation and 
preventing violent extremism, with 
equal participation of women and men  
Baseline : 10 (2021) 
Target : 20 (2026) 
Data source: MOINC, NCIC, NCTC  
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
Data source: NSC, National Cohesion and 
Integration Commission (NCIC), National 
Counterterrorism Centre (NCTC) 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MOINC  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MOINC 
 
 
 
Output 1.2. Capacity of rights-holders 
and governance institutions to ensure 
transparency, accountability and human 
rights principles towards the attainment 
of SDGs enhanced  
 
 
Data source: NSC, NCIC and NCTC  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MOINC  
 
 
 
 
 
22-05799 
9/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
Italy 
United Kingdom 
Norway 
Finland 
Peacebuilding Fund 
Indicator 1.2.1. Proportion of persons, 
by gender, accessing justice through 
formal and alternative justice systems 
Baseline: 29% (2018) 
Target: 45% (2026 ) 
Data source: Justice Needs Satisfaction 
survey, 2018, and Alternative Justice 
Systems baseline policy, 2021. 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.2. Proportion of persons 
subjected to HIV-related stigma and 
discrimination  
Baseline: 35% (2020) 
Target: 25% (2026) 
Data Source: HIV Stigma Index and 
Kenya AIDS Framework II, 2020-2025 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data source: Judiciary/National Legal Aid 
Service (NLAS) 
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
Output 1.3. Enhanced capacity and 
governance of duty-bearers to support 
public delivery of basic services at 
national and devolved levels.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of counties 
with improved monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E), planning and 
budgeting capacities  
Baseline: 8 (2021) 
Target: 14 (2026) 
Data source: State Department of 
Planning -  Monitoring and Evaluation 
Department and Council of Governors  
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
Data source: Judiciary/NLAS; civil society 
organizations  
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3.2. Proportion of counties 
that have enacted policies and laws to 
support gender-sensitive service 
delivery 
Baseline: 57% (2022) 
Target : 70% by 2026 
Data source: MOD, Council of 
Governors (COG), County Assemblies 
Forum  
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3.3. Percentage of counties 
with mechanisms for inclusive public 
participation of women, youth and 
PWDs  
 
 
 
22-05799 
10/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
Baseline: 70% (2022) 
Target (year): 85%  2026 
Data source: COG, CAF and MOD. 
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3.4. Proportion of county 
governments reporting improved public 
finance management processes and 
systems for equitable, efficient and 
accountable service delivery 
Baseline: 50% (2021) 
Target: 75% (2026)  
Data source: COG, Office of Auditor 
General, Office of Controller of 
Budget, National Treasury  
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Proportion of positions, by 
sex, age, people with disabilities 
(PWDs) in public institutions (national 
and local legislatures) compared to 
national distributions. 
National legislature % women   
Baseline  23% (2021) 
Target: 33% (2026) 
Local legislature % women  
Baseline 34.5% (2022) 
Target 40% (2026) 
 
Output 1.4. Electoral, legislative and 
oversight institutions strengthened to 
promote inclusive, transparent and 
accountable governance and service 
delivery 
 
Indicator 1 4.1.  
Number of institutions with 
strengthened capacities for transparent 
and accountable governance through 
UNDP support  
Baseline: 8 (national) (2020) 
Target: 16 (2026)  
Data source: Perception 
surveys/KNBS/COG 
Frequency: Annual  
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: A globally competitive and prosperous country with a high quality of life by 2030 
2.1. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 2.  By 2026, people in Kenya at risk of being left behind – particularly in the ASAL 
counties, informal urban settlements, all women and girls, all children and youth – derive benefit from inclusive, sustainable, diversified and environmentally/climate-sensitive quality 
livelihoods with decent work in the sector economies, and realize growth that is resilient, green, and equitable 
SDGs 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions  
Proportion of men, women and children 
of all ages living in poverty in all its 
dimensions according to national 
definition 
Baseline: 53% (2020) 
Data source: KNBS 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: State Department of Planning 
(SDP) 
Output 2.1. Inclusive and resilient 
green growth policies, financing and 
practices across key growth sectors 
enhanced 
MOD 
Ministry of Industrialization, 
Trade and Enterprise 
Development (MOITED  
Regular – $3.8 million 
Other – $26.2 million 
 
 
22-05799 
11/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
52.0%  male; 54.0% female; 
48% children; 52% adults  
Target: 28%  
National Treasury, Kenya 
Industrial Training Institute 
Kenya National Chamber of 
Commerce and Industry 
Kenya Private Sector Alliance 
Kenya Investment Authority 
Kenya Association of 
Manufacturers (KAM) 
International Labour Organization 
United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization 
FAO 
UNCDF 
United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development 
European Union 
Sweden 
Russia 
Japan 
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of risk-
informed development strategies and 
plans in place 
Baseline: 2 (2017) 
Target:10 (2026) 
Data source: KNBS; National Treasury; 
Kenya Investment Authority   
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Employment in formal and informal 
sectors  
Baseline:  
17% formal (KNBS 2020)  
83% informal  
Target: 
Formal 25%  
Informal 75%  
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.2. National policy 
frameworks, planning, budgeting and 
data systems for SDG indicator 
tracking and reporting and M&E 
systems strengthened 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data source: MOITED  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: SDP 
 
 
Kenya ranking in Green Growth Index 
for Africa.  
Baseline:  
14th in Africa (2019) Green Growth 
Index  
Target:  
11th in Index 
Indicator 2.2.1. Percentage of SDG 
indicators captured in the National 
Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation 
system achieved  
Baseline: 131 (54.6%) 2021 
Target ): 166 (71.9%) 2026 
Data source: KNBS  
Frequency: Biennial  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.3. Capacities to promote 
innovation in existing and emerging 
markets enhanced across productive 
sectors for youth, women and micro, 
small and medium-sized enterprises 
(MSMEs) 
 
 
Data source: MOITED  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: SDP 
 
 
Indicator 2.3.1. 
Proportion of formal to informal jobs in 
productive sectors, by gender  
Baseline: Formal 17%, informal, 83% 
(2020) 
Target ): Formal 25%, informal75% 
(2026) 
Data source: KNBS, Ministry of 
Labour 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.3.2. 
Number of innovative products and 
services certified for existing and 
emerging markets by women- and 
youth-led MSMEs in productive 
sectors, disaggregated by sector  
Baseline: 290 (2021) 
22-05799 
12/14 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
Target: 500 (2026) 
Data source: Kenya ICT Authority; 
Kenya Institute of Administration; 
Kenya Intellectual Property Institute  
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: A nation living in a clean, secure and sustainable environment 
2.2. COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP No. 3. By 2026, people in Kenya at risk of being left behind – particularly in the ASAL 
counties, informal urban settlements, all women and girls, all children and youth – have access to and derive benefit from sustainably managed ecosystems for nature-based solutions in a 
green transition. 
SDGs 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3. Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk 
Indicator 3.1. Tree cover as a 
proportion of total land area (%)   
Baseline: 7.28% (2022) 
Target: 12% (2026) 
Data source: Kenya Forest Service (KFS)  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: Ministry of Environment and 
Forestry (MOEF) 
Output 3.1. Sustainable management 
of natural resources at  national, 
subnational and grassroots levels, using 
people-centred approaches, enhanced 
Regular: $1.4 million 
MOEF 
Ministry of Energy 
National Environment   
Management Authority 
Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Action 
National Environment 
Trust Fund 
NDMA 
NDOC 
United Nations 
Environment Programme 
World Food Programme 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) 
KAM 
Global Environment 
Facility 
Japan 
Russia  
Other: $48.6 million 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2. Number of deaths, 
missing persons and directly affected 
persons attributed to disasters, per 
100,000 population 
Baseline: 
Target:  
Data source: National Disaster Operation 
Centre (NDOC)  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: NDOC  
Indicator 3.1.1. Areas of landscape – 
forests and rangelands – under 
improved management practices 
Baseline: 3.4MHa (2021) 
Target: 600,000Ha (2026) 
Data source: KFS; Department of 
Resource Surveys and Remote Sensing 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.3. Percentage of 
households using renewable energy and 
green technologies. 
Baseline: 70% (2022) 
Target: 90% (2026) 
 
Data source: KNBS  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MOEF  
 
Indicator 3.1.2. Number of people (by 
gender and rural/urban) benefiting from 
initiatives to protect and promote 
sustainable use and management of 
natural resources  
Baseline: 10,000 (2021) 
Target: 60,000 (2026) 
Data source: KFS; Frequency: Annual 
 
. 
 
 
Output 3.2. Capacities and resilience 
to disaster risks and climate impact 
across national and county levels 
enhanced 
 
Indicator 3.2.1. No. of counties with 
gender-responsive policies and legal 
framework for disaster risk reduction 
Baseline: County 14, national 0 (2021) 
Target: County 23, national 1 (2026) 
22-05799 
13/14 
 
 
DP/DCP/KEN/4 
 
 
Data source: National Disaster 
Management Authority (NDMA) 
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 3.2.2. No. of people (by 
gender) benefiting from climate-smart 
initiatives  
Baseline: 5,876 female, 5,930 male 
(2021) 
Target: 90,000 (2026) 
Data source: NDMA 
Frequency: Annual 
Output 3.3. Access to cost-effective 
clean energy enhanced  
Indicator 3.3.1. No. of technologies 
transferred to improved access to clean 
and affordable energy 
Baseline: 12 (2021); Target: 15 (2026) 
Data source: Ministry of Energy 
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 3.3.2. No. of people (by 
gender) benefiting from clean cooking 
solutions (clean energy) 
Baseline: (4.16m women and 4.12m 
men) (2021);Target: 8.8 m (2026) 
Data source: NDMA 
Frequency: Annual 
Output 3.4. Capacities to deliver on 
nationally determined contributions 
enhanced – national/county level 
Indicator 3.4.1. No. of Mt CO2e 
reduced from climate mitigation 
initiatives implemented 
Baseline: 143Mt CO2e (2021) 
Target: 142Mt CO2e (2026) 
Data source: Ministry of Energy 
Frequency: Annual 
Indicator 3.4.2. No. of counties with 
gender-responsive policies and legal 
framework for climate change  
Baseline: 35 (2021) 
Target: 47 (2026) 
Data source: Ministry of Energy 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
22-05799 
14/14 
 
