Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 5
III. Programme and risk management: Page: 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 9
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
I.   Programme rationale 
1.  Equatorial  Guinea  is  an  upper-middle-income  country  with  a  per-capita  gross  national 
income of approximately $10,890 in 2015, which declined by 7.5 per cent due to the oil price 
shock of 2014.1 The country graduated from the  least developed  countries group in 2017, 
based  on  the  income-only  criterion.  The  country  ranks  135th  out  of  188 countries  in  the 
Human Development Index, with an indicator of 0.592, which is below the average (0.631) 
for countries in the medium human development range. While poverty rates decreased from 
76.8 per cent in 2006 to 43.7 per cent in 2011, rural-urban inequalities remain high, with the 
two  major  cities  offering  the  mainstay  for  most  Equato-Guineans.2  The  population  and 
housing census, 2015, indicates that 72.2 per cent of the 1,225,337 people live in the mainland 
and  27.8  per  cent  reside  in  the  insular  region.  Seventy  per  cent  live  in  urban  areas  and 
30 per cent in rural areas.3 Youth (below age 25) represent 60 per cent of the population; in 
the  20-24  age  group,  23.5  per  cent  are  unemployed.  The  rate  is  higher  for  women 
(26.7 per cent) than men (21.2 per cent). The labour force survey, 2015, estimates that there 
are 20,000 entrants into the labour market each year, presenting risks of increased levels of 
vulnerability and inequality unless skills gaps are addressed and decent jobs created.  
 
2.  Equatorial Guinea ranks 173rd out of 190 countries in the Doing Business Index,4 and its 
business environment is dominated by a few large companies, primarily in the oil sector, with 
limited in-country value addition and employment generation, and weak linkages to emerging 
small and medium enterprises. Oil and gas account for more than 85 per cent of the gross 
domestic product, more than 85 per cent of fiscal revenues, and more than 94 per cent of 
exports.5 Equatorial Guinea is the third-largest crude oil producer in sub-Saharan Africa, and 
oil  revenues  have  allowed  the  country  to  make  significant  investments  in  infrastructure, 
particularly in roads, ports and airports, public buildings, and housing.6 However, its status 
as an upper-middle-income country reflects the paradox of having the highest per capita gross 
national  income  in  sub-Saharan  Africa7  and  at  the  same  time,  high  levels  of  poverty 
(43.7 per cent).8 Women represent two-thirds of those earning less than two dollars per day.9 
 
3.  Government efforts to modernize the administration have been remarkable in recent years. 
However,  persistent  weakenesses  at  central  and  local  levels  contribute  to  deficits  in 
governance,  including  limited  access  to  public  services,  weak  planning  systems,  lack  of 
budget discipline and weak contract and law enforcement mechanisms. The Ibrahim Index 
of African Governance, 2016, ranked Equatorial Guinea 46th out of 54 countries in Africa, 
with a score of 36.8 (out of 100) in overall governance, primarily due to declining scores in 
safety, rule of law, participation, and human rights. In 2016, the Transparency International 
Corruption Perception Index ranked the country 136th out of 175 countries, with a rating of 
19 out of 100. The country is a signatory to many regional and international human rights 
conventions  and  treaties,  but  falls  short  in  national-level  ratification,  implementation  and 
monitoring.  In  the  Universal  Periodic  Review,  the  country  has  yet  to  address  the  200 
recommendations made in 2014 and during 2016 midterm reporting.10 
 
4.  Gender  inequality  remains  a  challenge,  despite  government  efforts.11  Only  two  of  the 
25 newly  appointed  cabinet  ministers  are  women;  only  three  of  the  28  vice-ministers  are 
                                                           
1 International Monetary Fund (IMF) country report No. 16/358, November 2016. 
2 National MDG report, 2015.  
3 Integrated labour force survey, 2015; National Statistics Institute, 2016  
4 http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/equatorial-guinea  
5 UNDP/African Development Bank (AfDB) African Economic Outlook; IMF, World Bank; Government of Equatorial 
Guinea 
6 National Plan for Economic and Social Development evaluation reports, African Economic Outlook 2016 
7 Per capita gross national income declined from $25,000 in 2000 to $10,890 in 2017. National Statistics Institute, 2016  
8 National MDG report, 2015.  
9 African Development Bank, 2013 
10 https://www.upr-info.org/en/review/Equatorial-Guinea 
11 Decree 16/2018, February 2018 
2 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
women. Although women head both the senate and the parliament, women’s representation 
in the legislative branch is low (14 per cent, and 27 per cent in both upper and lower houses). 
High rates of sexual and gender-based violence are recorded, with 63 per cent of 15-year-old 
girls experiencing physical violence and 32 per cent of women reporting having been victims 
of sexual violence. HIV prevalence rates in the 15-49 age group are 6.2 per cent, the highest 
in  the  sub  region;  and  women  carry  the  heaviest  burden,  with  8.3 per cent,  compared  to 
3.7 per cent for men. Prevalence rates are higher  on the mainland, at 7.5 per cent, against 
3 per cent in the insular region. On the mainland, 10 per cent of women are HIV positive, 
against 4.5 per cent of men. The most recent comprehensive national data  sources are the 
demographic health survey, 2011, and the general population census, 2015. Weaknesses in 
evidence-based  policy  formulation  and  service  delivery  are  due  to  outdated  and  lack  of 
disaggregated data.  
 
5.  For a small country, 90 per cent of whose surface is water, Equatorial Guinea has a unique 
concentration of biodiversity, terrestrial and marine ecosystems that provide a safety net of 
resources  and  ecosystem  services  to  local  communities.  However,  the  country  faces  risks 
associated  with  climate  change,  loss  and  degradation  of  forests  and  ecosystems,  and 
endangered  fauna.  Weak  monitoring  and  law  enforcement,  and  unsustainable  logging 
operations,  contribute  to  the  depletion  of  the  forest  cover,  while  hunting,  poaching,  and 
damage to farm-based livelihoods near protected areas threaten species such as elephants, 
primates, and turtles with extinction. Notwithstanding investments in institutional capacity 
for conservation, only a small number of protected areas are operational and effective, and 
the environmental heritage remains vulnerable due to weak concession practice, exploitation, 
poor  planning,  limited  surveillance  and  law  enforcement.  Mainstreaming  biodiversity, 
climate change, and resilience-building into national and sectoral plans and practices is in its 
infancy, requiring more investment in capacity support, implementation and strengthening of 
governance  systems.  The  new  country  programme  builds  on  the  past  cooperation  and 
leverages  the  global  partnership  that  UNDP  enjoys  with  the  Global  Environment  Facility 
(GEF), the Green Climate Fund, and related international funds and mechanisms, including 
South-South and triangular cooperation.  
 
6.  The  programme  builds  on  the  final  evaluation  and  evidence  of  the  previous  country 
programme, highlighting UNDP comparative advantages : (a) partnership and policy support 
in the context of the Millennium Development Goals: UNDP (and the United Nations system) 
will continue to play a role in upstream policy support towards integrating the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  into  national  policies  and  strategies  beyond  the  National  Plan  for 
Economic and Social Development, 2020; (b) sustainable environment projects: UNDP will 
scale  up  its  cooperation  with  the  GEF  and  include  the  Green  Climate  Fund  and  other 
mechanisms  in  supporting  sustainable  environmental  management;  (c)  statistical  capacity 
development,  including  production  and  analysis  of  data,  undertaking  socio-economic 
surveys: UNDP has  forged a strong partnership  with the National Statistics  Institute, and, 
with the United Nations system, continues to focus on building national capacities to produce 
Sustainable  Development  Goals-related  statistics;  (d) central  and  local  administration 
institutional capacity strengthening: UNDP will build on its access and ability to work with 
key  ministries  in  development  planning,  trade,  and  commerce,  labour  and  social  security, 
local  administration,  social  affairs,  and  gender  equality;  (e)  awareness-raising  on  human 
rights, gender and women’s empowerment, and improving transparency and accountability: 
with  the  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Human  Rights  (OHCHR), 
UNDP will continue to support the universal periodic review process; (f) expand information 
and communications technology  for development: UNDP will work with the International 
Labour  Organization  (ILO)  and  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 
Organization  (UNESCO),  building  on  the  knowledge  of  information  and  communications 
technology centres adapted to skills training, primarily for youth and women; and (g) support 
to the national HIV/AIDS response: UNDP is a partner of choice to the Government (and the 
United Nations system). UNDP  will continue to play a role in procurement and capacity-
building to combat HIV/AIDS. 
 
3 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
7.  The  Assessment  of  Development  Results,  2017,  concluded  that  UNDP  presence  in 
Equatorial Guinea is justified given its human development indicator, which reflects the need 
to tackle poverty, inequality, and institutional weakness. However, its upper-middle-income 
country status, resource constraints, limited official development assistance (ODA), and the 
absence of donor and other funding sources, render  the UNDP programme and operations 
less  flexible.12  Despite  its  diminishing  share  in  United  Nations  Development  Assistance 
funding, the United Nations system remains the most important development partner in the 
country.13 The new programme focuses on key strategic interventions, balancing coverage 
between the insular part of the country and the mainland and broadening partnerships beyond 
government  to  include  non-state  actors  and  greater  participation  of  civil  society 
organizations.  
 
8.  The  journey  towards  achieving  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  contains  complex, 
interrelated challenges requiring integrated responses from government and civil society. The 
National  Plan  for  Economic  and  Social  Development  offers  a  solid  foundation  for  the 
country’s development path. It seeks to leverage high-quality investments in infrastructure 
necessary for structural transformation, and fast-track economic diversification, progress on 
human  development  and  achievement  of  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals.  Significant 
progress was made towards the Millennium Development Goals, but the integrated nature of 
the Sustainable Development Goals will require greater coordination between government, 
the  private  sector,  civil  society  organizations,  and  development  partners.  The  newly 
established National Statistics Institute will play a central role in rolling out the 2030 Agenda 
and the Sustainable Development Goals, providing data and evidence for policymaking. This 
will require institutional capacity support to fill the data gap, and a focus on mainstreaming 
and implementing international commitments in the upcoming National Plan. 
 
9.  Continued  efforts  are  needed  to  achieve  national  goals  of  economic  diversification, 
governance, human capital, and quality of life, while ensuring environmental sustainability. 
The theory of change calls for strategic focus on accelerating structural transformation for 
sustainable  development  and  eradicating  poverty  in  all  its  dimensions.  Under  the  new 
programme, UNDP interventions will: (a) provide national institutions with the capacities to 
develop evidenced-based, integrated policies that promote sustainable development and the 
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, while addressing inequalities, with an 
emphasis  on  the  most  vulnerable;  (b)  target  skills  development  and  promotion  of 
opportunities for decent jobs and self-employment, particularly for women and youth, and 
pursue  the  promotion  of  human  rights,  including  gender  equality  and  women’s 
empowerment;  (c) address  the  challenges  of  climate  change,  biodiversity  and  sustainable 
management of protected areas, build resilience, and protect the environment and livelihoods 
of local communities. Only by adopting a holistic approach can UNDP contribute to inclusive 
sustainable development and strengthen effective, accountable governance. 
 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
10.  Based on the lessons from the previous programme,14 and consistent with its Strategic 
Plan,  UNDP  will  employ  a  two-pillar  approach  focusing  on  inclusive  sustainable 
development, and strengthening governance and accountability. The strategic objectives are 
contributing to structural transformation, poverty eradication, effective governance, gender 
equality, and sustainable environment. Within the national development setting, UNDP will 
respond to government priorities with the following signature solutions: (a) keeping people 
out  of  poverty;  (b)  strengthening  effective,  inclusive  and  accountable  governance;  and 
(c) promoting nature-based solutions  for a sustainable planet.  UNDP is  well positioned to 
                                                           
12 Equatorial Guinea receives about 0.01% of ODA (MDG report, 2015). 
13 Equatorial Guinea finances about 70% of the current United Nations Development Assistance Framework (2013-2017).  
14 Final evaluation of the country programme, 2013-2017, Assessment of Development Results, 2017, for Equatorial Guinea, 
under ‘Programme rationale’. 
4 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
deliver  programmatic  support  for  national  development  priorities  and  institutional-level 
capacity  development,  mobilize  technical  expertise  and  financial  resources,  using  the 
national implementation  modality. Its partnership with government and ability to dialogue 
with national authorities at all levels will be expanded to include civil society and community-
based organizations. Investments will strengthen the capacities of national actors, systems, 
and  institutions  through  targeted  policy  interventions.  The  programme  focuses  on  eight 
results-based, gender-sensitive interventions in an upstream portfolio approach, as opposed 
to over 17 wide-ranging outcomes in the previous programme.15 
 
11.  UNDP  will  leverage  its  role  and  global  know-how  as  an  integrator  across  policy, 
programmatic and organizational silos and will assist the Government in convening across 
line ministries and development partners, supporting development coordination mechanisms, 
formulating  national  development  policies  and  strategies,  and  aligning  them  with  the 
Sustainable Development Goals. Potential partners include resident and non-resident United 
Nations agencies, funds, and programmes, AfDB, the World Bank, the French Development 
Agency and the United States of America. UNDP will continue to act as service provider to 
the Government and the United Nations system, playing a central role in partnerships and 
resource mobilization for United Nations operations across the country.16 UNDP will work 
with government ministries (finance, economy and planning, commerce, industry and energy, 
social affairs and gender equality, agriculture, forestry and environment, labour and social 
security,  fisheries  and  water  resources,  health  and  social  wellbeing,  interior  and  local 
governments,  ombudsman,  and  the  parliament)  to  ensure  coordination,  effective  policy 
advice, and efficient service delivery.  
 
Pillar 1. Inclusive and sustainable development 
 
12.  UNDP  will  support  the  Government  in  delivering  integrated  policy  solutions  and 
services  that  promote  economic  diversification  and  accelerate  inclusive  growth,  decent 
employment,  and  gender  and  income  equality.  The  programme  will  support  economic 
diversification,  productive  capacity-building,  and  the  development  of  trade  and  industrial 
policies, as part of implementation of the Enhanced Integrated Framework;17 and promote 
investments in technology and innovation, particularly in labour-intensive sectors, to create 
decent jobs and  improve livelihoods for the  most  vulnerable people, especially  youth  and 
women.  Given  the  geographic  location  of  the  country  and  its  vast  abundance  of  water 
resources, interventions promoting ‘green’ jobs and a ‘blue’ economy  will be emphasized. 
To deliver integrated policy solutions, UNDP will continue supporting the  Government in 
mainstreaming  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  in  the  national  planning  and  policy 
framework, promoting greater coordination across the Government and other stakeholders to 
increase  policy  coherence  and  the  capacity  of  the  national  statistical  system  for  data 
collection, analysis, and reporting on the Goals. 
 
13.  In  partnership  with  ILO,  UNESCO,  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization  (FAO), 
UNFPA,  the  private  sector  and  potential  donors,  UNDP  will  support  the  economic 
empowerment of youth, promoting education and access to decent employment. Investments 
will support skills development, particularly for young women, through national scholarship 
schemes  and  technical  vocational  and  educational  training,  to  close  the  skills  gap.  A  job 
intermediation  system  will  address  information  asymmetries  in  the  labour  market  and 
promote access to employment for women and youth. The programme will use data from the 
National  Statistics  Institute  to  develop  targeted  strategies  for  each  group  –  women’s 
                                                           
15 Assessment of Development Results, 2017. 
16 The past United Nations Development Assistance Framework and the country programme, 2013-2017, were 70 per cent co-
funded by the Government. 
17 https://www.enhancedif.org  
5 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
economic empowerment measures, and youth market-based training schemes, for example. 
Tailored capacity support to small and medium-sized enterprises, including access to finance, 
technology, and innovation, will promote self-employment and entrepreneurship and expand 
employment opportunities for women and youth. The promotion of inclusive business will 
help small and medium-sized enterprises access larger value chains, generate employment, 
and  acquire  new  technologies.  Upstream  policy  support,  in  collaboration  with  ILO,  the 
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United States of America, and 
the  World  Bank,  will  strengthen  government  capacity  to  engage  in  trade  and  regional 
integration issues, widening economic opportunities for youth and women. Revisions of legal 
and regulatory frameworks will be required to promote inclusive growth, providing small and 
medium-sized enterprises with access to finance and improving the business environment. 
 
14.  UNDP will collaborate with ILO, the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), and 
other  United  Nations  organizations,  to  develop  and  roll  out  the  national  social  protection 
system  to  address  exclusion,  build  resilience  to  crises,  while  expanding  people’s 
opportunities. The social protection system will provide cash transfers and support services 
for  the  full  life-cycle  of  the  most  vulnerable  people.18  The  social  protection  strategy  will 
inform  the  scope  of  the  social  protection  scheme  and  the  establishment  of  a  governance 
framework that ensures coordination across ministries.  In the fight against HIV/AIDS, the 
programme will use UNDP networks and capacities, including the Global Fund mechanism, 
to  deliver  high-quality  support  to  government,  together  with  UNAIDS,  to:  (a)  ensure  that 
people  living  with  HIV  receive  treatment  through  its  reliable  procurement  systems; 
(b) remove punitive laws, policies, practices, stigma and discrimination that block effective 
responses to AIDS; (c) meet the HIV needs of women and girls and stop sexual and gender-
based violence; and (d) promote awareness campaigns on the pandemic19. 
 
15.  Leveraging its long-standing role as an implementing agency for GEF, the programme 
will: (a) invest in strengthening institutional capacity for the governance of biodiversity and 
the  national  protected  areas  system,  including  developing  and  implementing  plans  for 
biodiversity  conservation  and  sustainable  natural  resources  management;  (b)  promote 
integration  of  biodiversity  concerns  into  national,  subnational,  and  sector  development 
policies  and  plans;  (c)  promote  sustainable  management  of  forest  areas  outside  protected 
areas, with a focus on logging concessions; and (d) working with key ministries, invest in 
identifying  and  implementing  sustainable  financing  strategies  for  biodiversity  and 
ecosystems  conservation.  This  will  include  leveraging  partnerships  with  GEF,  the  Green 
Climate Fund, and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) plus; 
Drexel  University,  Bioko  Biodiversity  Protection  Programme,  the  United  States,  and  the 
French  Development  Agency;  as  well  as  engaging  the  private  sector  in  environmental 
sustainability  initiatives.  The  few  (large)  corporations  in  the  hydrocarbon  sector  offer  an 
opportunity to the programme through their corporate social responsibility plans. UNDP is 
working with Noble Energy, Marathon Oil, and the Ministry of Mines and Industry to scale 
up this work. 
 
16.  UNDP  will  continue  to  engage  local  communities,  particularly  women  and  youth,  in 
biodiversity  conservation  and  sustainable  management  of  natural  resources,  building 
resilience  to  environmental  degradation  and  climate  change.  Support  will  include  climate 
change  adaption  and  mitigation  measures  and  promotion  of  renewable  energies.  UNDP 
investments  will  contribute  to  sensitization,  education  and  awareness  raising,  targeting 
                                                           
18 UNDP supporting the National Statistics Institute in collaboration with the World Bank and UNICEF to produce the 
multidimensional poverty index 
19 The Government fully finances national efforts against HIV/AIDS, and UNDP is its partner of choice in anti-retroviral 
procurement.  
6 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
communities  and  government  authorities;  and  strengthen  the  capacity  of  communities  to 
develop and implement plans and adopt sustainable practices for the use of natural resources, 
ecotourism, income generation, and biodiversity conservation activities. The approach will 
combine employment and livelihoods strategies in line with the national employment policy, 
and community development strategies outlined in the National Plan for Economic and Social 
Development. The programme will scale up biodiversity conservation investments based on 
community livelihood priorities and  will strengthen the resilience of local communities to 
environmental  degradation  and  climate  change.  Partnerships  will  be  developed  with  the 
National  Institute  for  Forestry  Conservation   and  the  National  Institute  for  Environmental 
Coordination, the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Equatorial Guinea, the 
National  University  of  Equatorial  Guinea,  national  non-governmental  organizations,  the 
Network  of  Women  of  Central  Africa,  the  Biodiversity  Protection  Programme,  GEF,  the 
Green Climate Fund, and the Central African Forestry Commission. 
 
17.  To  ensure  environmental  sustainability  and  national  ownership,  and  scale  up  those 
efforts  by  promoting  greater  community  involvement,  UNDP  will  leverage  its  experience 
with environmental finance from vertical funds, such as GEF, to support efforts to eradicate 
poverty, reduce inequality and promote sustainable development. This pillar will contribute 
to keeping people out of poverty (Sustainable Development Goal 1); good health and well-
being for all (Goal 3), gender equality (Goal 5); promoting decent work and economic growth 
(Goal 8); making cities and human settlements safe, resilient and sustainable (Goal 11); and 
protecting  and  promoting  sustainable  use  of  terrestrial  ecosystems,  sustainably  managing 
forests, and halting biodiversity loss (Goal 15). 
 
Pillar 2. Strengthen effective, accountable, and inclusive governance 
 
18.  Aligned  to  national  priorities,  the  programme  will  contribute  to  the  following 
transformational changes: (a) increased capacity of state institutions to formulate, implement 
and monitor policies and laws on human rights, rule of law, local development and inclusive 
growth; (b) regulatory frameworks at national and local levels to deliver high-quality public 
services;  and  (c)  effective  gender  equality.  UNDP  will  invest  in  building  responsive, 
accountable institutions to deliver equitable public services at the central and local levels to 
nurture  public  trust  and  confidence.  Support  will  include  technical  advisory  services  and 
building the capacities of civil society organizations, women’s groups and youth associations, 
working with government, the private sector and local communities to develop tools and best 
practices  while  building  and  transferring  skills  and  capacities  among  actors.  Capacity  to 
mainstream gender into the national, sectoral and subnational plans and budgets and their 
implementation will be developed to ensure that the strategic needs of vulnerable youth and 
women are taken into consideration.  
 
19.  The  programme  will  contribute  to  strengthening  national  systems  and  regulatory 
frameworks to promote and protect human rights, increase civic engagement, and improve 
the  accountability  and  transparency  of  public  institutions.  It  will  support:  (a)  capacity-
building  of  national  stakeholders  to  implement  and  monitor  international  human  rights 
commitments and other treaty reporting obligations, and support the empowerment of civil 
society in human rights advocacy, specialized national institutions, and grassroots initiatives, 
promoting  the  rights  of  women  and  the  most  vulnerable;  (b)  strengthening  civil  society 
capacity to engage in policy dialogue and advocacy to ensure effective citizen voice and calls 
for accountability over the use of public resources at national and local government levels; 
and (c) supporting the decentralization policy through capacity-building of local authorities 
and administration to accomplish their mandate and role in providing inclusive community 
services. These interventions will contribute to ending poverty in all its forms, everywhere 
(Sustainable Development Goal 1); furthering gender equality (Goal 5); reducing inequalities 
(Goal 10); and promoting peace, justice and strong institutions (Goal 16).  
 
7 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
20.  The programme will enhance the institutional capacity of parliament and the executive 
branch to increase women’s political participation, including the appointment of women to 
decision-making and high-level positions within the administration, with the support of the 
UNDP Gender in Public Administration initiative. Efforts will be made in engendering the 
national budget to ensure that public investments are gender-responsive and benefit men and 
women  equally.  The  UNDP  Gender  and  Economic  Policy  Management  initiative  will 
enhance the parliamentary and judiciary systems through institutional capacity-building to 
accelerate the ratification, enforcement and dissemination of the national legislation, which 
is harmonized with international gender-sensitive laws, complying with international human 
rights law and the constitution.  
 
21.   UNDP  will  mobilize  the  private  sector,  civil  society  and  non-governmental 
organizations, the Government, bilateral partners and multilateral organizations, through its 
global network, including its specialized and regional bureaus and South-South partnerships, 
to  improve  accountability  and  transparency  by  strengthening  the  justice  system  and 
expanding knowledge concerning protection of human rights. UNDP will focus collaboration 
with OHCHR and other partners on advocacy for compliance with international human rights 
conventions and greater gender equality, and with UN-Women and other organizations on 
initiatives to reduce gender-based violence and foster a robust, professional, and sustainable 
media sector.  
III.  Programme and risk management  
22.  The country programme document is the primary basis of accountability to the Executive 
Board for results alignment and resources assigned at the country level.  Accountability of 
managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to execution of country 
programmes are prescribed in the UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures 
and the internal control framework. National implementation, with operational support from 
UNDP, is the preferred modality. Direct implementation will be used on an ad hoc basis, in 
agreement with the Government. The Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used 
in coordination with other United Nations organizations to improve efficiency and manage 
financial risks. Direct project costs will be implemented in accordance with Executive Board 
decision 2013/9. Building on experience with the previous programme, UNDP has identified 
resource mobilization measures to diversify sources of financing that will complement and 
reinforce  the  use  of  ex  ante  strategies  (risk-reduction  and  risk-mitigation).  These  include 
monitoring  the  foreign  exchange  risks  linked  to  government  cost-sharing  contributions  in 
local  currency.  In  support  of  the  differentiated  physical  presence  modality,  the  host 
Government  will  expand  its  financial  support  to  the  base  structure  of  the  office  with  an 
increase  in  government  contributions  towards  local  office  costs.  The  size  of  the  UNDP 
presence  will be directly tied to government support levels  for both local office  costs and 
government cost-sharing.  
 
23.  With 
limited  bilateral  and  multilateral  partners,  mobilizing  resources  beyond 
government  cost-sharing  will  be  critical  for  programme  sustainability.  This  calls  for  a 
broader, more creative approach to partnerships and support to the  Government to harness 
available and innovative financing options, including climate financing and working with the 
private sector. UNDP will scale up existing partnerships based on the strength of results and 
links  built  with  the  Government  and  development  partners.  This  includes  expanding  the 
funding  pipeline  through  collaborative  agreements  with  partners  and  government.  Long-
standing coordination mechanisms with the United Nations country team and other partners 
will be strengthened to achieve synergies on collective climate change programmes. Under 
the leadership of the Resident Coordinator, and within the framework of the United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework steering committee, UNDP will continue its central role 
in partnership building and resource mobilization in support of joint United Nations system 
programmes. Ongoing partnerships will be strengthened, particularly in areas supporting the 
8 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
transition to a ‘green-and-blue’ economy, with significant potential to be pursued for South-
South and triangular cooperation. 
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
24.  To  promote  national  ownership  and  establish  synergies  for  reporting  results, 
performance indicators have been derived from the  monitoring and evaluation frameworks 
of the National Plan for Economic and Social Development, the United Nations Development 
Assistance Framework, the Strategic Plan (integrated results and resources framework) and 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  indicators,  with  special  attention  to  gender  and  women’s 
empowerment 
to  gender  and  women’s 
empowerment  will  be  tracked  using  the  UNDP  gender  marker.  UNDP  will  support  the 
development of national capacities, including implementing partners and other stakeholders, 
in data collection, management, analysis, dissemination and utilization, to improve planning 
and  monitoring  and  evaluation  for  decision-making  towards  the  Sustainable  Development 
Goals. UNDP will support the development of accountability mechanisms in the public sector 
and civil society organizations to help them become  flexible change agents, responsive to 
community needs. 
issues.  Country  programme  contributions 
 
25.  UNDP will support the National Statistics Institute in ensuring availability of timely and 
reliable disaggregated data. High-level consultations and dialogue will be organized at least 
once  a  year  to  review  programme  effectiveness  and  efficiency.  At  the  project  level, 
programme monitoring will be undertaken on a quarterly basis, and at country programme 
outcome  levels,  at  least  once  annually.  UNDP  will  develop  a  monitoring  and  evaluation 
framework that draws to the extent possible on the National Plan for Economic and Social 
Development and its sectoral plans and strategies, using national information and statistics. 
To ensure effective implementation of the monitoring and evaluation plan, at least 5 per cent 
of the country programme budget will be allocated to these activities. This will enable UNDP 
to  set  up  and  manage  a  cost-shared  monitoring  and  evaluation  function,  supporting  the 
baseline, monitoring and evaluations, including impact evaluation of all results. 
  
9 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Equatorial Guinea (2019-2023) 
National priority or goal: Strengthen human capital and improve the quality of life 
United Nations Development Assistance Framework – UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP  
Outcome 1. By 2023, young people, women and persons with disabilities have better and equitable access to decent employment opportunities.  
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 1. Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions 
Indicative country programme 
outputs (indicators, baselines, 
targets) 
Major partners/ 
partnerships 
frameworks 
UNDAF outcome indicators (Ind.), 
baselines, target(s) 
Data source, frequency of data collection, 
and responsibilities 
Indicative resources by 
outcome (in $ thousands) 
1.1.2. MLPESS reports, World Bank data 
reports, ILO reports.  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MLPESS. 
Ind.1.1. Rate of agricultural 
employment  
Baseline: (2016):18.3% 
Target: 36 % 
Output.1.1. Ministry of Finance, 
Economy and Planning and other 
central government ministries have 
the capacity to develop and 
implement evidence-based policies 
promoting inclusive, diversified and 
sustainable economic development.  
Ministry of Finance, the 
Economy and Planning 
(MFEP) 
Regular: 258 
 
Other: 28,950 
 
Ministry of Labour, 
Promotion of 
Employment and Social 
Security (MLPESS) 
 
Ind.1.2: Rate of industrial 
employment  
Baseline (B) (2016):18.4 % 
Target (T): 36 % 
 
Ind.1.1.1. Number of policies, plans, 
strategies and programmes that 
promote inclusive and sustainable 
economic development implemented. 
B (2017) : 1 
T 5  
Data source (DS): MFEP reports; 
MCPSME, MINDE, United Nations 
reports.  
Frequency: Annual  
 
Ministry of Education, 
University Teaching 
and Sports (MEUTS) 
 
 
Ministry of Commerce 
and Promotion of Small 
and Medium Enterprises 
(MCPSME) 
  
Ministry of Culture, 
Tourism and Artisan 
Promotion (MCTA)  
 
Indicator1.1.2. Number of 
comprehensive surveys with 
disaggregated data undertaken by the 
National Statistics Institute (INEGE)   
B (2017): 2  
T: 5  
DS INEGE statistics yearbook.   
Frequency: Biannual 
 
Ministry of Industry and 
Energy (MINDE); 
Ministry of social affairs 
and gender equality 
(MSAGE)  
 
 
Ministry of Health and 
Social Well-being 
(MOH) 
Ind.1.1.3. Number of ‘green and 
blue’ jobs created for men and 
women  
B (2017): 0 
T (2023): 5,000 (cumulative) 
DS: MLPESS reports data reports 
 
Office of the Prime 
Minister (OPM) 
10 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
Frequency: Annual 
 
INEGE 
 
 
 
World Bank  
 
 
ILO 
Ind.1.3. Unemployment, youth total 
(% of total labour force 15-24)  
B (2017): 11.8 % 
T: 6%  
1.2. MLPESS reports, data reports, ILO 
reports 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MLPESS; World Bank; 
ILO 
MLPESS 
Output.1.2. Women and youth have 
improved technical and financial 
capacities for entrepreneurship and to 
match labour market needs. 
  
 
MEUTS 
 
MCPSME 
 
 
Ind.1.4. Unemployment, female (% 
of female labour force)  
B (2017): 7.1 % 
T: 3.5% 
Ind.1.2.1. Percentage of women and 
youth granted credit to create or 
develop their business 
B: 5% 
T: 30 % 
DS: National Plan for Economic and 
Social Development (PNDES) 
reports 
Frequency: Annual  
  
MSAGE  
 
OPM 
 
 
World Bank; 
 
ILO 
 
Technical vocational 
and educational training 
centres 
 
Ind.1.2.2. Percentage of women and 
youth participants in educational or 
vocational trainings who found a job 
within 6 months 
B (2017): To be determined 
T: 30% 
DS:  MLPESS reports. 
Frequency: Annual  
Ind.1.5. Proportion of population 
covered by social protection 
floors/systems, by sex, children, 
unemployed persons, older persons, 
persons with disabilities, pregnant 
women, new-borns, work-injury 
victims, the poor and the vulnerable:  
B. (2017): 30% INSESO coverage  
T: 100% 
1.3. Government, United Nations reports.  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MSAGE 
Output 1.3. Government institutions 
have improved technical capacity to 
establish an inclusive social 
protection system  
MLPESS 
 
 
MSAGE 
 
 
MOH 
 
 
Ind.1.3.1. Extent to which policy 
measures and institutional capacities 
are in place to increase access to 
social protection schemes, 
disaggregated by target groups: 
(a) sex, (b) age, (c) urban poor 
(d) rural population 
B (2017): 0 
T: 3 
 
OPM 
 
National Social Security 
Institute (INSESO) 
 
  
 
UNFPA 
 
UNAIDS 
11 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
DS: Government and United Nations 
reports  
Frequency: Annual  
 
UNICEF 
 
Ind.1.3.2. Percentage of female-
headed households that have received 
cash transfers through the national 
social protection system  
B (2017): 0% 
T: 30 %  
DS: Government and United Nations 
reports 
Frequency: Annual  
 
Indicator 1.3.3. Number of people 
who access HIV and related services, 
disaggregated by sex and type of 
service: 
(a) Behavioral change 
communication  
     (i) Number of males reached   
     (ii) Number of females reached  
B (2017): 345 (male and female) 
T (2023): 998 
DS: Government and United Nations 
reports 
Frequency: Annual  
 
(b) Anti-retroviral treatment  
     (i) Number of males reached  
     (ii) Number of females reached 
B (2017): 18,900 
T (2023): 32,400  
DS: MOH 
Frequency: Annual 
National priority or goal:  Towards a sustainable environment.  
UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP: Outcome 2. By 2023, the population of Equatorial Guinea uses its naturel resources (marine, forest and water resources) in a 
sustainable manner.  
Related Strategic Plan outcome: 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.  
Ind.2.1: Hectares of land sustainably 
managed through protected area 
management, biodiversity and 
ecosystem conservation 
2.1. MALFE national reports. 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: UNDP, MALFE  
Output.2.1. The Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry and 
the Environment (MALFE) has 
strengthened capacities for the 
MALFE  
Regular: 1,119 
 
 
Other: 9,950 
 
12 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
B (2017): 367,500 ha 
T: 470,158 ha 
effective and sustainable protection 
of biodiversity and the management 
of protected areas. 
Ministry of Fisheries 
and water resources 
(MFW) 
 
 
 
 
GEF 
Ind.2.1.1. Number of protected areas 
with operational management plans 
implemented  
B (2017): 2  
T: 5 
DS: Projects reports, MALFE 
Frequency: Annual  
 
GCF 
 
FAO 
 
French Development 
Agency (AFD) 
   
Ind.2.1.2. Natural resources 
managed under a sustainable use, 
conservation, access and benefit-
sharing regime: (a) Area of existing 
protected area under improved 
management (hectares); (c) Area 
under sustainable forest management 
(hectares) 
B (2017): (a) 367,500 ha; 
(c) 367,500 ha 
T: (a) 470,158 ha; (c) 470,158 ha 
 
Non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs). 
DS: Project reports, MALFE 
Frequency: Annual  
 
Ind.2.1.3. Level of funding from 
private sector to finance sustainable 
environmental initiatives 
B (2017): To be determined   
T: $2,000,000 
DS: MALFE reports  
Frequency: Annual  
Output 2.2. Local communities, 
particularly women and youth, adopt 
sustainable practices for natural 
resources management and 
adaptation to climate change 
MALFE 
Ind.2.2. CO2 emissions (kt) 
B (2014): 5,346.5 kt  
T: 1,781 kt  
2.2. MINDE 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: MINDE 
  
 
MFW 
 
 
 
MINDE 
 
 
Ind.2.2.1. Number of communities 
adopting sustainable practices for 
natural resources management and 
adaptation to climate change 
GEF 
 
GCF 
 
13 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
B (2017): 2 
T: 10 
DS: MALFE, MINDE, UNDP/GEF 
project progress reports  
Frequency: Annual  
FAO 
 
AFD 
 
NGOs 
 
Ind.2.2.2. Proportion of households 
benefiting from clean, affordable and 
sustainable energy: (a) women-
headed; (b) in rural areas; (c) in 
urban and peri-urban areas 
B (2017): 0 
T: (a) 5% (b) 5% (c) 5% 
DS: GEF project progress reports  
Frequency: Annual  
National priority or goal: High-quality governance at the service of citizens 
UNDAF (or equivalent) outcome involving UNDP: 3. By 2023, State institutions have efficient public management based on standards, procedures, programmes and reliable 
data on public and economic policies based on evidence, which strengthens the participation of civil society organizations (CSOs) in the process of strengthening the effective 
functioning of State institutions. 
Related strategic plan outcome: Outcome 2. Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development.   
Ind.3.1: Public management index 
rank 
B (2016): 50 
T: 40 
3.1. Ibrahim Index of African Governance 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim Foundation  
Output 3.1. Enhanced institutional 
capacity for access to high-quality 
basic services at local levels in 
mainland and insular regions 
MFEP 
Regular: 28 
 
 
Ministry of Interior and 
Local Administration 
Other: 12,250 
 
 
 
 
MSAGE 
Ind.3.1.1. Proportion of people 
accessing basic services, 
disaggregated by target groups: 
(a) poor, (b) women, (c) youth 
B (2017): To be determined  
T: 60 %  
DS: MSAGE reports, INEGE 
statistics yearbook. 
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
INEGE 
 
Agencia Nacional 
Guinea Ecuatorial 2020 
(ANGE2020) 
 
CSOs 
 
 
Private sector 
organizations (PSOs) 
Ind.3.1.2. Number of local 
governments with local development 
plans 
B (2017): 0 
T: 5  
DS: Reports on local governments, 
PNDL project reports. 
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
14 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
Ind.3.3.: Corruption Perception 
Index rank  
B (2017): 171 
T: 161 
3.3. Corruption Perception Index report  
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: Transparency International 
Output 3.2. MOJ and national 
human rights institutions have 
strengthened technical capacities to 
expand access to justice and combat 
discrimination, focusing on women 
and other marginalized groups. 
Ministry of Justice 
(MOJ) 
 
 
Department for the 
Promotion of Human 
Rights (DPHR) 
 
 
 
 
MSAGE  
Ind.3.2.1. Number of people who 
have access to justice, disaggregated 
by sex and marginalized groups: (a) 
Formal justice systems, (b) Informal 
justice systems. 
B (2018): To be determined 
T: (a) 60,000 (b) 120,000 
DS: MSAGE, MOJ reports. 
Frequency: Annual  
 
ANGE2020 
 
CSOs 
 
PSOs 
 
Ind.3.2.2. Number of Universal 
Periodic Review recommendations 
implemented. 
B (2012): 26  
T: 100 
Source: DPHR   
Frequency: Annual 
 
Ind.3.2.3. Number of laws related to 
human rights that have been ratified 
B (2017):7 
T: 12 
DS: MOJ, DPHR  
Frequency: Annual  
Output.3.3. Parliament and the 
executive have enhanced technical 
capacities to lead measures that 
advance gender equality and 
women’s empowerment. 
MFPE 
Ind.3.2. Gender Equality Index rank  
B (2016): 42  
T: 32 
3.2. Ibrahim Index of African Governance 
Frequency: Annual  
Responsibility: Mo Ibrahim Foundation  
 
 
DPHR 
 
 
 
MSAGE 
 
 
Ind.3.3.1. Number of measures in 
place that set and monitor progress 
towards numeric targets for women’s 
leadership in (a) public sector (b) 
not-for-profit sector 
B: 0  
T: 10 
ANGE2020 
 
CSOs 
 
PSOs 
15 
 
DP/DCP/GNQ/3 
 
 
DS: MSAGE 
Frequency: Annual  
 
Ind.3.3.2. Number of legal, policy 
and institutional reforms adopted to 
remove structural barriers to 
women’s empowerment, including 
sexual and gender-based violence. 
B: 1  
T: 2 
DS: MOJ, DPHR 
Frequency: Annual  
 
 
16 
