Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……: Page: 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….……………: Page: 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….………………: Page: 7
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework 
 
1.  From 2017 to 2022, Haiti experienced a series of multidimensional crises. In this period, 
the  country  experienced  the  assassination  of  the  President  and  had  six  successive  Prime 
Ministers, each of whom remained in office for an average of nine months. The combined 
impact  of  weakened  social  cohesion  and  political,  economic,  health,  institutional, 
constitutional,  security  and  natural  crises  aggravated  an  already  complex  humanitarian 
situation.  In  2021,  more  than  4.4  million  people,  or  about  40  per  cent  of  the  population 
(57 per cent of whom are women), depended on emergency assistance for their survival. On 
14 August 2021, a 7.2 magnitude earthquake struck the southern peninsula of Haiti, the same 
areas still recovering from the devastation of hurricane Matthew in 2016. Recovery needs 
were  estimated  at  $2 billion.  The  number  of  people  needing  humanitarian  assistance 
increased  from  4.4 million  in  2021  to  4.9 million  in  2022,  some  43  per  cent  of  the  total 
population, of whom 58 per cent are women. The rate of women’s participation in decision-
making remains very low, particularly at the central level. In the last legislature, women held 
only  three  seats  in  parliament.  Integrating  gender  into  public  policies  and  implementing 
positive  actions  and  other  policies  to  promote  gender  equality  and  profound  social 
transformation remain necessary. 
2.  Progress on most development indices is losing momentum, raising fears that the country 
is  unlikely  to  meet  the  targets  of  its  Sustainable  Development  Goal  action  plan  by  2030, 
exacerbated since 2022 by a significant deterioration in security and rising inflation, leading 
to extensive protests and lockdowns, including slowdowns in social and economic activity.   
3.  This country programme is aligned with the  Strategic Development Plan 2012-2030 (Plan 
Stratégique  de  Développement  d’Haïti  (PSDH))  and  the  United  Nations  Sustainable 
Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) 2023-2027. It contributes to the UNDP 
Strategic Plan 2022-2025 and its signature solutions. The UNDP programme benefited from 
the  process  for  developing  the  UNSDCF,  led  by  the  Ministry  of  Planning  and  External 
Cooperation (Ministère de la Planification et de la Coopération Externe (MPCE)) and a multi-
stakeholder reference group. Based on the Common Country Analysis, the Ministry and the 
reference  group  validated  the  priorities  of  the  UNSDCF,  which  are  aligned  with  the  four 
priority areas of the PSDH. In the proposed programme, UNDP will exercise its comparative 
advantage, which lies in its multidimensional and human-centred approach to development, 
its capacity to intervene in all aspects of the humanitarian, development and peace nexus and 
its role in multi-actor coordination. This makes UNDP a key interlocutor for technical and 
financial  partners  and  other  actors  in  the  United  Nations  system,  including  the  political 
mission.  
4.  The 2020 evaluation of the previous country programme found that the strengths of UNDP 
are its strategic positioning  in  governance, poverty reduction and support for  disaster  risk 
management;  its  ability  to  adapt  and  respond  quickly  to  recurrent  crises;  and  its 
mainstreaming of gender across its programmatic areas.  
5.  Through South-South partnerships, UNDP has contributed to greater national capacities 
to  access  renewable  energy,  strengthening  electoral  processes  and  vocational  training. 
Programmatic  and  complementary  collaboration  with  other  actors  in  the  United  Nations 
system in key areas has been crucial to ensuring coordinated action and greater impact aligned 
with national priorities. For example, joint work with the United Nations Integrated Office in 
Haiti (Bureau intégré des Nations Unies en Haïti (BINUH)), the United Nations Office for 
Project Services, the International Office for Migration, the United Nations Entity for Gender 
Equality  and  the  Empowerment  of  Women  (UN-Women),  the  United  Nations  Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 
in the areas of the rule of law and governance and support of the electoral cycle resulted in 
greater synergy and streamlining of resources and more effective advocacy for key reforms. 
Coordination with the World Food Programme (WFP) and other agencies in support of the 
National Policy for Social Protection and Promotion (Politique nationale de protection et de 
promotion  sociale  (PNPPS))  promises  to  continue  to  bear  fruit  by  promoting  a  national 
22-27505 
2/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
protection system for the most vulnerable. The close collaboration between UNDP and the 
United  Nations  Office  for  the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs  in  response  to  the 
multiple  disasters  between  2017  and  2022  demonstrates  the  importance  of  supporting 
national leadership in crisis preparedness and response.   
6.  Despite structural and cyclical crises, over the past five years, UNDP has contributed to 
strengthening  the  coordination  capacity  of  actors  and  the  National  Disaster  and  Risk 
Management System (Système National de Gestion des Risques et des Désastres (SNGRD)), 
whose  legal  framework  was  created  in  2020.  In  addition,  the  systematic  consideration  of 
gender  equality  issues  under  the  2017-2021  programme  contributed  to  the  country  office 
being  awarded  the  UNDP  Gender  Equality  Seal.  The  presence  and  advocacy  of  UNDP 
resulted  in  initiatives  for  better  protection  and  employability  of  youth  and  women  via 
innovative partnerships with the private sector.  
7.  The country programme evaluation strongly recommended that a transformational theory 
of change support the programme for 2023-2027 in alignment with the UNDP Strategic Plan,  
2022-2025 and its three directions of change. UNDP Haiti will consider the best approach to 
address the structural causes of the country’s fragilities and accelerate recovery from current 
crises and shocks. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
8.  The programme’s vision is that national and local institutions: (a) encourage citizen and 
civic  participation  to  restore  trust  between  the  State  and  the  population;  (b)  contribute  to 
institutional stability and modernization of the State; and (c) participate in the improvement 
of  the  country’s  socioeconomic  conditions.  The  UNDP  transformational  theory  of  change 
leverages its value added in governance, institution-building and public policy development 
and promotion as a cross-cutting approach for developing national capacities for integrated, 
coordinated and inclusive development and for implementing public policies. 
Priority area 1 (UNSDCF pillar 1): the rule of law, good governance and human rights 
9.  The  underlying  hypothesis  is  that  if  independent  and  democratic  systems  in  Haiti  are 
enhanced and effective,  and security is gradually guaranteed through an effective security 
sector,  then  the  management of  public  affairs  will  serve  the  general  interest  of  the  nation 
responsibly,  and  be  accountable  and  transparent  towards  the  Haitians  most  exposed  to 
vulnerabilities and inequalities including women, girls, youth, persons with disabilities and 
communities in hard-to-reach geographical areas. 
10.  UNDP  will  build  on  its  good  reputation  and  ongoing  decades  of  experience  working  
alongside  national  authorities  and  developing  their  capacities.  Adopting  an  integrated 
programmatic approach, UNDP will advocate for the most marginalized and those at risk of 
discrimination,  focusing  particularly  on  supporting  agency  and  defending  the  rights  of 
women,  youth  and  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender,  intersex  and  other  (LGBTI+) 
communities.  More  systemically,  UNDP  will  progressively  contribute  to  restoring  trust 
between the State and the population, to political and institutional stability and to reducing 
gender  inequalities.  UNDP  will  implement  the  global  gender  strategy  to  reduce  gender 
inequalities, encouraging institutional transformation. 
11.  In collaboration with other United Nations actors, including BINUH, national partners 
and  regional  bodies,  UNDP  will  implement  initiatives  encouraging  civic  engagement  to 
restore  trust  between  the  State  and  the  Haitian  population  via  the  electoral  process.  The 
ongoing work of UNDP to support national efforts at the community and national levels to 
reduce community violence, combat impunity and corruption, increase access to justice and 
strengthen  the  capacities  of  the  Haitian  National  Police  not  only  builds  on  existing 
programmes and partnerships but is a complementary effort to address systemic deficiencies 
which have hindered positive civic engagement and mutual accountability, and ultimately the 
exercise  of  the  rule  of  law.  Addressing  the  serious  levels  of  gender-based  violence  will 
continue to be a focus of UNDP work on prevention and response. UNDP will advocate for 
inclusion, including on LGBTI+ issues, as a cross-cutting aspect of its work. 
22-27505 
3/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
12.  Drawing on experiences from the Latin American and Caribbean region, UNDP will seek 
to  expand  its  South-South  collaboration,  including  but  not  limited  to  the  experiences  of 
Mexico and Brazil in areas such as electoral support and law enforcement. Innovation will 
continue to be critical to the success of UNDP work in these areas, partly due to the instability 
in the functioning of some services, such as judicial hearings and overcrowding. For example, 
UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Justice and Public Security (Ministère de la 
Justice et de la Sécurité Publique (MJSP)) to find ways to hold exceptional hearings to reduce 
pretrial detention levels and increase the use of alternatives to the application of criminal law 
for civil matters. Long-standing national partners such as the MJSP, the Provisional Electoral 
Council,  the  Office  of  the  Ombudsperson,  national  anti-corruption  bodies  and  key  civil 
society actors will continue to be critical for UNDP engagement as it also seeks to diversify 
its national partnerships and expand its work in governance and the rule of law. The ongoing 
and evolving collaboration with BINUH will require UNDP to adjust its programming while 
remaining aligned with the UNSDCF. 
Priority area 2 (UNSDCF pillar 2): Equitable and sustainable growth 
13.  The hypothesis is that if a new economic model, vector of growth and sustainability – 
favourable to livelihood creation and retention for young people and women, and capable of 
substantially reducing poverty and inequality – is developed and implemented, then national 
economic growth will be inclusive and reduce poverty and inequalities. 
14.  Significant  effort  is  needed  in  Haiti  to  engage  effectively  in  equitable  economic 
development and tackle gross economic inequalities. UNDP will work with national partners 
like  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and  Finance,  the  MPCE,  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and 
Industry  and  the  Ministry  of  Public  Works,  Transport  and  Communication  to  become  a 
recognized  thought leader and to further develop public policies in a coordinated manner. 
UNDP will focus on the transition to green, sustained and inclusive economic growth that 
eliminates  economic  and  social  inequalities  and  leaves  no  one  behind.  Informed  and 
coordinated  public  policy  development  must  be  based  on  technically  sound  analysis  that 
consider  the  country’s  multi-faceted  complexities  and  vulnerability  to  climate-induced 
disasters. UNDP will explore opportunities to support a blue economy and renewable energy 
strategies, building on strong examples from other countries in the region and the experiences 
of  other  small  island  developing  States.  Public  and  private  investments  and  expenditures 
related  to  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  will  be  promoted  through  an  integrated 
national  financing  framework  under  the  leadership  of  the  MPCE  and  the  Ministry  of 
Economy and Finance, in partnership with the private sector. UNDP efforts will contribute 
to  longer-term  engagement  in  reducing  economic  and  social  inequalities  while  remaining 
flexible enough to respond to sudden-onset crises. In this manner, UNDP will contribute to 
breaking the cycle of fragility.  
15.  UNDP  will  focus  its  partnership  strategy  on  supporting  the  development  of  national 
capacities, which is its raison d'être. Building on the example of its ongoing collaboration 
with  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  UNDP  will:  (a)  strengthen  institutional 
capacities for more equitable provision of services to economic actors, particularly micro and 
small enterprises; and (b) promote sustainable consumption and production within the public 
and  private  sectors.  UNDP  will  rely  on  the  added  value  of  the  United  Nations  system 
agencies,  funds  and  programmes  present  in  Haiti  and  the  partnerships  it  can  forge  with 
technical expertise available outside the country, such as the Economic Commission for Latin 
America  and  the  Caribbean  (ECLAC)  and  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Trade  and 
Development, and will work with agencies with experience in Haiti such as the International 
Labour Organization, the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations 
Office on Drugs and Crime. UNDP will support national partners to engage with new and 
different  sources  of  financing  for  development,  building  on  the  initial  support  for  the 
integrated national financing framework in 2021 and 2022. 
 
 
22-27505 
4/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
Priority area 3 (UNSDCF pillar 3): Social services, protection and inclusion 
16.  This hypothesis is that if national policies are designed and implemented to strengthen 
the social contract and improve access to quality basic social services for the most vulnerable, 
then the population will be more resilient to shocks. 
17.  UNDP will direct its unique efforts and capacities (using a human rights-based approach 
grounded in the principle of leaving no one behind) to bring together and mobilize national 
and  international  actors  to  support  the  Government’s  promotion  of  inter-institutional  and 
multi-stakeholder  policy  development  and  implementation,  particularly  concerning  social 
protection  and  access  to  basic  social  services.  UNDP  will  support  institutionalizing  the 
national  architecture  established  in  the  PNPPS.  UNDP  will  collaborate  with  ECLAC, 
UNFPA,  UNICEF  and  WFP,  which  have  considerable  experience  in  this  regard.  Lessons 
learned from previous experiences will be applied to advocate for a continued expansion of 
social  protection  so  that  more  long-term  and  sustainable  strategies  and  programmes  are 
prioritized.  The  convening  power  of  UNDP  as  a  provider  of  integrated  solutions  for  the 
United  Nations  system  will  be  critical  in  this  area.  Previous  efforts  of  integrating 
multidimensional  poverty  into  vulnerability  registers  need  to  be  sustained,  and,  where 
possible, complementary to the existing UNDP multi-risk mapping. In parallel, UNDP will 
continue  to  reinforce  the  functions,  funding  and  capacities  of  subnational  institutions  to 
provide better basic and quality social services, especially in the aftermath of crises, that meet 
the  needs  of  the  population  most  at  risk  of  vulnerability,  including  women  and  youth, 
especially victims of gender-based and community violence.  
18.  Collaboration  will  be  deepened  with  the  Ministry  of  Social  Affairs  and  Labour 
(Ministère  des  Affaires  Sociales  et  du  Travail  (MAST)),  the  Ministry  of  Education  and 
Professional Training, the Ministry of Health and local authorities to complement the actions 
of  other  international  partners  in  this  sector,  in  particular  the  international  financial 
institutions with major programming and investments in Haiti, the World Bank and the Inter-
American  Development  Bank.  In  working  with  this  diverse  range  of  partners,  UNDP  can 
leverage  its  vast  experience  in  human-centred  sustainable  development  to  ensure  that  the 
strategies designed by national counterparts  include governance reforms and  yield longer-
term dividends beyond crisis management.  
Priority  area  4  (UNSDCF  pillar  4):  Multidimensional  territorial  governance  and 
environmental management. 
19.  According to this hypothesis, if national  and local authorities, communities and other 
relevant  actors  are  aware  of  gender-sensitive  normative 
to  pilot 
multidimensional  risk  management  to  support  territorial  governance  and  environmental 
management,  then  stakeholders  will  be  better  equipped  to  manage  risks  and  develop  in  a 
climate-sensitive and resilient manner at the national and local level.  
frameworks 
20.  Over the last 20 years, UNDP has worked to strengthen the capacities of national actors 
in  addressing  multidimensional  risk.  It  has  sought  to  ensure  that  the  tools  and  policies 
developed  together  with  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior  and  Territorial  Communities  and  its 
Directorate of Civil Protection, the Ministry of Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Natural Resources and Rural Development, among others, take into account the full range of 
the country’s vulnerabilities to disasters and the impact of climate change. 
21.  UNDP  will  support  standardizing,  implementing  and  monitoring  integrated  sectoral, 
environmental and energy policies that preserve and protect natural ecosystems and ensure 
the alignment of national with international standards. The consolidation and expansion of 
the progress made to date will depend on: (a) strengthened national capacities (government 
and civil society) to institutionalize and disseminate the knowledge and tools related to risk 
prevention, response and  mitigation as well as climate  adaptation; and  (b) the capacity of 
stakeholders to apply these tools and strategies at the national and local levels to inform local 
development, including planning and governance in a resilient manner.  
22.  The experience of other small island developing States, especially those in the region, 
will  continue  to  be  relevant  as  Haiti  seeks  to  combat  its  extreme  vulnerability  to 
22-27505 
5/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
multidimensional risks and increase its capacity for resilience. Lessons from other contexts 
where the critical humanitarian, development and peace nexus will be studied and applied as 
relevant. Here, UNDP global knowledge and technical capacities can be leveraged so that 
Haitian institutions can adapt and develop their strategies in this regard. UNDP programming 
will also consider the nexus in its conception and implementation.  
III. Programme and risk management  
23.  This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers 
at  the  country,  regional  and  headquarter  levels  with  respect  to  country  programmes  are 
prescribed  in  the  organization’s  programme  and  operations  policies  and  procedures  and 
internal control framework. 
24.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced  by direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with  other  United  Nations  agencies  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and 
classifications  for  programme  and  development  effectiveness  will  be  charged  to  the 
concerned projects. 
25.  The MPCE will oversee this programme. The multi-stakeholder reference group, chaired 
by  the  Minister  of  Planning  and  External  Cooperation  and the  Resident  Coordinator,  will 
oversee the implementation of the UNSDCF. 
26.  UNDP  will  continue  to  maintain  a  degree  of  flexibility  in  its  programming.  Political 
instability and exposure to disasters will require UNDP to consider the changing dynamics 
between political, economic, social and natural forces to contribute to the resolution of the 
current crisis. The s proven ability of UNDP to strike a balance between maintaining the core 
orientation of its programming while adapting to a highly volatile context will likely continue 
to  be  relevant  in  the  programme  cycle.  UNDP  will  support  inclusive  platforms  for 
consultation on national priorities, to the extent possible, to contribute to a gradual restoration 
of confidence between the State and the Haitian population. To minimize the risk of volatile 
contexts, UNDP will support its national partners in adopting planning approaches, digital 
transformation and innovation. In collaboration with civil society organizations, UNDP will 
facilitate  empowerment  dialogues  and  interventions,  raising  awareness  among  key 
stakeholders of the added value, benefits and opportunities that digitalization and innovation 
can bring to their sectors.  
27.  UNDP will maintain dialogue with all stakeholders to identify potential undue social and 
environmental harm caused by UNDP and will promote the use of grievance mechanisms as 
appropriate and the application of the organization’s social and environmental policies.  
28.  UNDP will review its capacity and determine appropriate measures to ensure its financial 
sustainability,  including  improving  cost  management  and  allocating  human  resources 
according to the programme’s needs. UNDP will also need to maintain flexibility to mobilize 
relevant human resources according to the context and potential increased brain drain, as well 
as emerging areas where additional or different expertise might be required. In the event of 
significant changes to the context, UNDP will respond to early warning signals, activate the 
corporate enterprise risk policy and escalate risks as appropriate. The national context has 
significant structural fragilities, cyclical crises and uncertainties; change in any of them is a 
source  of  concern.  Ongoing  and  strengthened  partnerships  at  the  technical  level  within 
national  partner  institutions  have  proven  to  be  a  reliable  risk  mitigation  strategy  and  a 
successful vehicle for strengthened national ownership.  
29.  UNDP will mitigate the risks inherent in the administration of the programme through 
regular monitoring and scenario-based analysis by making the necessary adjustments if the 
situation deteriorates.  
22-27505 
6/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation  
30.  Based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  evaluation  of  the  previous  programme,  the 
monitoring system for the implementation and evaluation of the  programme will focus on 
results at the outcome and output levels. This will enable UNDP to strengthen its capacity to 
analyse the impact of its interventions on the UNSDCF outcomes and national priorities to 
which  it  is  aligned,  especially  considering  the  limited  national  statistical  capacities  in  the 
country. 
31.  UNDP will invest resources in developing a dynamic gender-sensitive monitoring and 
evaluation system that supports national statistical efforts and integrates learning and uses 
new information technologies, including digitalization, to document the impact of its action 
on change actors disaggregated by age, gender, vulnerability and geographical location. The 
UNDP  gender  marker  will  track  gender  gaps  and  ensure  that  at  least  70  per  cent  of  total 
programme expenditure is in line with the gender equality strategy.  
32.  The  monitoring  and  evaluation  system  will  identify  the  follow-up  actions  needed  to 
support Haiti and its national monitoring systems in being back on track with the Sustainable 
Development Goals. To cover monitoring, evaluation and communication costs, UNDP will 
allocate  at  least  3  per  cent  of  project  budgets  to  cover  monitoring,  evaluation  and 
communication costs. UNDP will implement a balanced evaluation plan to ensure learning 
and accountability in agreement with the Government and in line with the UNDP evaluation 
policy and the United Nations Evaluation Group guidelines. 
33.  UNDP will support the Resident Coordinator in strengthening the integrated monitoring 
and evaluation capacity for the UNSDCF, particularly in the areas UNDP is committed to 
leading on behalf of the United Nations in Haiti. 
34.  Capacity-building  in  implementing  the  programme  should enable  national partners  to 
adopt and use new information and communication technologies for analysis, reflection and 
decision-making. Partners such as the ministries mentioned above and their subsidiary organs 
or  institutions will  benefit from  strengthened statistical or  data  analysis capacities.  As  the 
primary institutional partner of UNDP, the MPCE will be critical to the overall monitoring 
of progress towards the targets of the country’s Sustainable Development Goal action plan. 
35.  Given the current national context, the programme’s implementation will be reviewed 
twice  a  year  to  transparently  review  its  relevance  and  adapt  it,  if  necessary,  as  national 
governance developments occur. 
 
22-27505 
7/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Haiti (2023-2027) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Institutional Rebuilding (PSDH 2012-2030) 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1, UNSDCF Outcome 1: Legitimate and accountable institutions ensure the rule of law, good governance and respect for 
human rights 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions; 
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($) 
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S) 
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES  
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, baselines and targets) 
MAJOR PARTNERS/ PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 
 
Regular resources:  
$5,590,000  
1.1 Population’s level of 
confidence in the existing 
Government. 
Baseline (2022): not available 
Target (2027): More than 50% of 
the population has confidence in 
the Government  
BINUH, Semi-annual 
Output1.1: Public and private sectors are 
encouraged to restore trust between the 
authorities and the citizens in electoral 
matters. 
o  Prime Minister 
o  Ministries of Defence; of Foreign Affairs; of 
Interior and Territorial Collectivities; of 
Justice and Public Security; of Planning and 
External Cooperation;  of Public Works, 
Transport and Communication; of Women’s 
Affairs and Women’s Rights; of Youth, 
Sports and Civic Action  
 
UNDP, Annual  
 
Other resources:  
$77,270,000  
  
 
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of inclusive electoral 
consultation mechanisms, including at least 
one with women’s organizations and at least 
one with youth organizations  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 2 
Source: Provisional Electoral Council 
 
o  Superior Council of Judicial Power 
o  Directorate of the Penitentiary 
Administration 
o  National Council for Legal Assistance  
o  Anti-Corruption Unit  
o  Central Financial Intelligence Unit   
o  General Inspectorate of the National Police of 
 
Indicator 1.1.2: Percentage of women in 
elected positions in parliament and local and 
regional authorities   
Baseline:  
o 
o 
Haiti  
Interministerial Task Force  
o 
o  National Police 
o  National Commission for Disarmament, 
3% in parliament 2016-2021 
30% to the Board of Directors of the 
Communal Section), Assembly of the 
Communal Section and town halls 
Dismantling and Reintegration 
o  Provisional Electoral Council 
o  Office for the Protection of the Citizen  
o  Haitian Women’s Collective for Women’s 
Target level: 30% in all instances 
Source: Provisional Electoral Council 
Political Participation 
 
Indicator 1.1.3: Percentage of elected positions 
filled with elected authorities: 
Baseline (2022): 0% 
Target (2027): 80% 
Source: Provisional Electoral Council  
o  Foundation Je Klere 
o  People for Development 
o  Haitian Vision of Human Rights  
o  Citizen’s Organization for a New Haiti 
o  Blue Earth Foundation 
o  Lawyers Without Borders -Canada  
o  Lakou La Pè 
o  Viva Rio 
 
Indicator 1.1.4: Percentage of public decision-
making positions held by women 
22-27505 
8/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
o  Mobile Institute for Education and 
Baseline (2018): 38.5% 
Target (2027): 40% 
Source: Office of Management and Human 
Resources 
Output1.2: The judiciary is more 
independent, and the most vulnerable are 
better able to access fair justice that 
respects human rights, and the fight against 
corruption  
Democracy 
o  Governments of Canada, France, Germany, 
Italy, Switzerland, United States  
o  European Union 
o  Organization of American States 
IMF 
o 
o  BINUH 
IOM 
o 
o  OHCHR 
o  UNFPA 
o  UNICEF 
o  UNOPS 
o  UNODC  
o  UN-Women 
 
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of measures to 
strengthen accountability (including social 
accountability), prevent and mitigate 
corruption risks, and integrate anti-corruption 
in the management of public funds, service 
delivery and other sectors at the national and 
provincial level (integrated results and 
resources framework (IRRF)) indicator) 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 5 
Source: Ministry of Justice and Public 
Security, National Council for Legal 
Assistance 
 
Indicator 1.2.2: Number of complaints filed by 
women  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 5,000 
Source: Ministry of Justice and Public Security 
, National Council for Legal Assistance 
 
Indicator 1.2.3. Percentage of cases of 
prolonged pretrial detention in the republic’s 
detention centres 
Baseline (2022): 82%  
Target (2027): 75 % 
Source: DAP 
 
Indicator 1.2.4: Percentage of judicial 
jurisdiction which has a functioning Legal 
Assistance Office   
Baseline (2022): 38% 
Target (2027): 100% 
Source: National Council for Legal Assistance 
 
 
22-27505 
9/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.5: Corruption Perception Index  
Baseline (2022): 20 
Target (2027): 25 
Source: Transparency International 
Output1.3: The security sector is supported 
to promote human rights and combat 
impunity, and holistically integrate security, 
protection of property and people, and 
recovery of communities affected by 
violence 
 
Indicator 1.3.1: Ratio of police officers per 
100,000 inhabitants 
Baseline (2021): 128 
Target (2027): 155 
Source:  Haitian National Police 
Indicator 1.3.2:  Number of national policies, 
strategies, and action plans for conflict 
prevention and peacebuilding (IRRF indicator) 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): 4 
 Ministry of Planning and External 
Cooperation 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Economic Refoundation (PSDH 2012-2030)  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2, UNSDCF OUTCOME 3: A new inclusive, equitable economic model, vector of new investments, growth and 
sustainability, favourable to the rapid creation of decent jobs with a focus on youth and women, capable of substantially reducing poverty and inequalities, is formulated, endorsed and implemented.  
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
World Bank, Semi-annual 
2.1 Annual growth rate of real 
gross domestic product  
Baseline (2020): -3.3%  
Target (2027): +3 to +5% 
Output2.1.: The inclusive development and 
implementation of public policies are better 
coordinated by national institutions to 
facilitate a transition to green, sustained 
and inclusive economic growth  
o  Ministries of: Economy and Finance;  of 
Regular resources: 
$6,290,000  
Environment; of Planning and External 
Cooperation; of Social Affairs and Labour; of 
Trade and Industry  
 
 
Other resources: 
$16,930,000  
o  National Institute of Vocational Training 
o  Central Bank of Haiti 
o  Chamber of Commerce  
o  Haitian Association of Economic Journalists 
 
2.2: Poverty Rate  
Baseline (2022): 59%  
Target (2027): 56% 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.1: Existence of a national SDG 
road map  
Baseline (2022): No 
Target (2027):  Yes 
Source:  Ministry of Planning and External 
Cooperation 
for Sustainable Development  
 
2.3: Per capita income  
Baseline (2019 ): 1,272 USD  
Target (2027): 1,959 USD 
o  Groupe Croissance 
o 
o  European Union 
o  World Bank  
o 
o  University Agency of La Francophonie 
IMF 
 
Indicator 2.1.2: Number of institutions 
strengthened to promote the employability and 
IDB  
22-27505 
10/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
o  ECLAC 
o  FAO 
ILO 
o 
o  UNCTAD 
o  UNICEF 
o  UN-Women 
job creation of youth and women in support of 
promising sectors of agrifood, manufacturing 
and digital technologies 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 3 
Source: Ministries of Agriculture, Natural 
Resources and Rural Development; of 
Commerce and Industry;  IFAD 
Output2.2: Public and private sector invest 
and promote expenditure on sustainable 
development through an integrated national 
approach 
 
Indicator 2.2.1: Existence of an integrated 
national financing framework  
Baseline (2022): No  
Target (2027): Yes 
Source: Ministry of Planning and External 
Cooperation  
 
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of sectoral ministries 
involved in monitoring and reviewing progress 
in different funding flows and controlling 
public spending in relation to the Sustainable 
Development Goals. 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2027): 3 
Source: Ministries of Planning and External 
Cooperation; of  Economy and Finance; of 
Commerce and Industry 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Social Refoundation (PSDH 2012-2030) 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3, UNSDCF OUTCOME 4: The population, particularly vulnerable and marginalized groups, has better access to equitable, 
inclusive and quality basic social services, with an emphasis on respect for human rights, gender equality and disability inclusion, with a view of strengthening the social contract 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
o 
o  Ministries of Planning and External 
3.1 National coverage of the 
Information System of the Ministry 
of Social Affairs and Labor 
Baseline (2021): 25%  
Target (2027): 60%  
Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Labour  
Economic and Social Assistance 
Fund  
PNPPS, annual 
Output 3.1: Public institutions are 
supported in an inclusive way to implement 
the PNPPS. 
Prime Minister 
Regular resources: 
$4,790,000  
Cooperation; of Economy and Finance; of  
the Interior and Territorial Collectivities; 
of Social Affairs and Labour; of Women’s 
Affairs and Women’s Rights; of Youth, 
Sports and Civil Action 
Economic and Social Assistance Fund 
Local Authorities 
 
Other resources: 
$12,740,000  
 
Indicator 3.1.1: Number of gender-sensitive 
reports analysed on the implementation of the 
PNPPS at the national and departmental level 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 5 
 
 
 
3.2 Placement in the Human 
Development Index 
o 
o 
 
22-27505 
11/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
o  Korea International Cooperation Agency 
o  Governments of Canada, Chile, Japan 
o 
o  World Bank 
o 
ECLAC 
o 
FAO 
o 
ILO 
o  UNICEF 
o  UNFPA 
o  WFP 
Baseline (2021): 170th place out of 
189 countries 
Target (2027): 168th place out of 
189 countries 
Source: PNPPS Observatory, Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Labour 
IDB 
 
Output3.2: Subnational institutions have 
stronger functions, funding and capacities 
to provide basic and quality social services 
that meet the needs of the population most 
exposed to vulnerabilities, including women 
and youth  
 
3.3 Level of financing for the 
PNPPS from the national budget 
Baseline (2022): 10% 
Target (2027): 45 % 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2.1: 
Extent to which the country has policy 
measures and institutional capacities in place 
which aim to increase access to social 
protection schemes targeting the most 
vulnerable, including marginalized 
communities (IRRF indicator) 
Baseline (2022): Not adequately 
Target (2027): Partially 
Source: Ministries of Social Affairs and 
Labour; of Women’s Affairs and Women’s 
Rights 
 
Output 3.3: Comprehensive community and 
gender-based violence prevention and 
response programmes enable women and 
men to escape structural violence.   
 
Indicator 3.3.1. Number of central and local 
institutions whose capacities have been 
strengthened to address violence against 
women and girls.  
Baseline (2022): 200 
Target (2027): 500 
Source: Ministries of Social Affairs and 
Labour; of Women’s Affairs and Women’s 
Rights 
 
 
22-27505 
12/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Territorial Refoundation (PSDH 2012-2030)  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4, UNSDCF OUTCOME 5:  Information systems and financial mechanisms and normative frameworks sensitive to gender, 
protection and social inclusion, are put in place to help State authorities, local communities and other national actors to pilot and coordinate public policies to strengthen resilience based on risk 
management, territorial governance and environmental management 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3. Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk. 
Ministries of Planning and 
External Cooperation; of 
Environment; of the Interior and 
Territorial Collectivities  
Local authorities on the National 
Disaster Risk Management Plan  
Annual 
SDG Indicators:  
Output4.1.: Public institutions at the 
national and local levels have stronger 
capacities to control and disseminate 
knowledge in preventing and responding to 
disasters and protecting the environment. 
Regular resources:  
$5,600,000  
Ministries of Agriculture, Natural 
Resources and Rural Development; of 
Planning And External Cooperation; of 
Environment;  of the Interior and 
Territorial Collectivities; of Public Health 
and Population;  
of Public Works, Transport and 
Communication  
Local Authorities 
 
11.b.2 Proportion of local 
governments that adopt and 
implement local disaster risk 
reduction strategies in line with 
national disaster risk reduction 
strategies Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 3 
 
Other resources:  
$38,820,000 
 
Indicator 4.1.1: Number of knowledge 
dissemination and decision support tools for 
disaster risk prevention and management and 
climate change adaptation developed and 
communicated 
Baseline (2022): 12  
Target (2027): 15 
Source:  Civil Protection Agency and Ministry 
of Environment annual reports 
 
o 
o  National Directorate of Potable Water and 
General  Directorate  of  Civil 
Protection, Annually 
 
13.b.1 Existence of nationally 
determined contributions, long-term 
strategies, national adaptation plans, 
strategies as reported in adaptation 
communications and national 
communications 
Baseline (2022): No 
Target (2027): Yes 
Sanitation 
 
o  Ayitica (company) 
o  Alliance for Risk Management and 
 
Business Continuity  
o  Media 
o 
o  Haiti Climate  
o 
o  New Grand’ Anse Foundation 
o 
o  World Bank  
o  Government of the United States 
o  Helvetas (NGO) 
o  Heifer International 
o 
o 
o  UNEP 
o  UNESCO 
o  UNFPA  
o  UNICEF 
o  UNOPS 
o  WFP 
Le Nouvelliste,  
 
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of new information 
technologies to disseminate knowledge and 
good practices in the prevention and 
management of disaster risks and 
environmental protection 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): 3  
Source: see 4.1.1 above 
Output4.2: Public institutions at the 
national and local levels have stronger 
capacities for the integrated 
implementation of the National Disaster 
Risk Management Plan and the National 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan . 
Institute of Technology and Animation 
 
IDB  
 
FAO 
IOM 
 
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of members of the 
National Disaster and Risk Management 
System that integrate multidimensional risks 
and gender, including the prevention of 
gender-based violence in disaster contexts in 
their planning and programming 
Baseline (2022): 0  
 
22-27505 
13/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
Target (2027): 3  
Source: National Disaster and Risk 
Management System 
 
Indicator 4.2.2: Number of new information 
technologies to document and update the 
integrated implementation of the National 
Disaster Risk Management Plan and the 
National Action Plan for Climate Change 
Baseline (2022): 4 
Target (2027): 10  
Source: National Disaster Risk Management 
Plan, National Action Plan for Climate 
Change 
 
Indicator 4.2.3: Number of concrete actions 
for prevention and multidimensional risk 
reduction at the national and/or local level 
carried out by National Disaster and Risk 
Management System actors identified and 
updated using new information technologies 
disaggregated by gender of its promoters 
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target (2027): 3 of which at least 1 promoted 
by women  
Source: Civil Protection Agency Annual 
reports 
Output 4.3. Public and private institutions, 
including civil society, youth and volunteer 
networks, have stronger capacities to 
support local development and spatial 
planning with solutions based on terroir 
and nature that focus on the green and 
inclusive economy  
 
Indicator 4.3.1: Number of transformative 
models of resilient landscapes that have a 
concrete impact on the multisectoral resilience 
of communities implemented on a pilot basis 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): 6 
Source: Ministries of Environment; and of the 
Interior and Territorial Communities, annual 
reports 
 
22-27505 
14/15 
 
DP/DCP/HTI/4 
 
 
Indicator 4.3.2: Number of local initiatives, 
including civil society, youth and volunteer 
networks, supported in the application of 
green and circular economy standards 
disaggregated by geographical area and 
category of intervention, disaggregated by 
gender of its promoters 
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target (2027): 10 total, 3 promoted by women  
Source: Ministries of: Environment; and of the 
Interior and Territorial Communities,  annual 
reports 
 
Indicator 4.3.3: Number of departmental 
sector tables and departmental technical 
councils that improve the quality of public 
services by integrating the green and circular 
economy into gender-sensitive local 
development plans 
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target (2027): 5  
Source: Ministries of the Environment;  and of 
the Interior and Territorial Communities, 
annual reports 
 
 
22-27505 
15/15 
 
