Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 7
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP  within  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework 
1.  Sri Lanka is experiencing one of the worst economic crises since independence in 1948, 
with twin crises –  depleted dollar reserves and excessive  debt overhang. A build-up of debt 
sustainability and public finance issues over several decades were exacerbated by the Easter 
Sunday attacks in 2019, which led to a dip in growth. The COVID-19 pandemic compounded 
these issues, with further loss of tourism revenue and  the impact of lockdown measures. By 
April 2022, the crisis was acute, with dollar reserves at record lows, affecting the purchase of 
essential commodities and leading to shortages of fuel, gas, food and medicine. Together with 
the devaluation of the  rupee, this has pushed up the cost of living by at least 30 per cent to 
40 per cent. Given the reduced tax base,1 low government revenue, and sparse foreign direct 
investment,  the  fiscal  space  remains  constrained.  Businesses  have  been  heavily  impacted, 
wages are insufficient to sustain a basic standard of living. The rising inflation rates signal that 
the number of poor households will likely increase from 11.9 per cent in 2019-2020.2 The social 
protection system does not provide adequate relief, resulting in new poor and vulnerable groups. 
2.  Against this background, Sri Lanka faces challenges in protecting development gains. In 
2021,  the  global  Sustainable  Development  Goals  Index3  ranked  it  87th  of  165  countries. 
Disparities and inequalities in poverty and vulnerability for specific groups  –women, young 
people, the elderly, the disabled and minorities – have intensified. Sri Lanka ranks low on the 
Global Gender Gap Index, 2021, of the World Economic Forum – at116th out of 156 countries 
and among the bottom 10 countries for political representation of women, with only 5.3 per cent 
in Parliament.4 Rights-based legislative and policy frameworks for disability inclusion remain 
largely unimplemented.  
3.  The onset of the socio-political and socio-economic crisis in 2022, and the rising trend in 
public  protests,  indicate  a  build-up  of  frustration  in  a  context  of  weakened  governance 
structures,  perceived  absence  of  accountability,  and  incoherent  planning  across  multiple 
political  cycles.  The  crisis  and  the  public  demand  for  reform  that  reintroduces  independent 
oversight  mechanisms,  strengthens  parliament,  and  removes  the  unrestrained  power  of  the 
executive  branch,  have  provoked  the  initiation  of  constitutional  reform.  The  report  of  the 
United Nations  Human  Rights  Commission,  in  March  2022,  underscored  the  deteriorating 
status of human rights and heightened risks to social cohesion.  
4.  Sri Lanka ranks among the top 10 most climate-vulnerable countries on the Climate Risk 
Index.  Projected  changes  of  climate  are  expected  to  impact  its  poorest  and  marginalized 
communities  the  most.  Conservation  and  sustainable  natural  resource  management  will  be 
pivotal for the long recovery and growth trajectory. In 2021, Sri Lanka updated its Nationally 
Determined Contributions, renewing commitments to increase forest cover up to 32 per cent, 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 14.5 per cent by 2030, and achieve carbon neutrality in 
electricity generation with no capacity addition of coal power plants by 2050.  
5.  The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), with 
its four mutually reinforcing strategic priorities and six outcome areas, responds to the policy 
priorities of the Government and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and focuses 
on equity and ‘leaving no-one behind’. UNDP will contribute to all six UNSDCF outcomes, 
primarily  to  No.  2,  Inclusive,  green-led recovery  and  growth;  No.  3,  Climate  resilience  and 
environmental  sustainability;  No.  4,  Governance,  justice  and  rule  of  law;  and  No. 5.  Social 
cohesion and human rights. Gender is mainstreamed across the outcomes, ensuring contribution 
to outcome 6.   
 
1 Central Bank annual report, 2019 
2 Department of Census and Statistics, 2019/2020 
3 Sustainable Development Report, 2021 (sdgindex.org) 
4 Inter-Parliamentary Union 
2 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
6.  The continuous decline in official development assistance increased the need for exploring 
alternative  and  blended  sources  of  financing  for  development  activities,  with  international 
financial institutions, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and non-traditional and 
private  sector  partners  (United  Nations  Global  Compact,  Biodiversity  Sri  Lanka).  While 
government  financing  through  UNDP  projects  has  been  limited  due  to  fiscal  constraints, 
alternative  models  such  as  increased  in-kind  support,  implementation  support  to  loans  from 
international  financial  institutions,  and  subnational  level  partnerships  are  being  explored. 
Scaling up the South-South partnership to promote renewable and green energy will be further 
explored. 
7.  This  country  programme  will  build  on  recommendations  of  the  2018-2022  programme 
evaluation,  which  noted  the  success  of  UNDP  in  adapting  its  governance  work  to 
transformational shifts in context; its strong partnership with the Ministry of  Justice; and its 
nimbleness in programming. The evaluation noted the holistic approach of UNDP to engaging 
the  private  sector,  leveraging  influence  on  economic  empowerment,  social  cohesion,  and 
progress towards meeting gender-responsive targets. UNDP received the Gender Silver Seal in 
2021, and is aiming for gold in 2022, demonstrating a firm commitment to gender inclusion in 
its  programming  and  management  practices.  The  evaluation  noted  the  access  UNDP  has  to 
vertical  funds,  such  as  the  Green  Climate  Fund,  assessed  to  have  catalysed  improved  water 
management for agriculture and drinking; disaster early warning; and standards and precedents 
for bottom-up, intersectoral interventions.  
8.  As a development partner in Sri Lanka for 55 years, UNDP brings five key comparative 
advantages to support its development priorities through the UNSDCF: (a) Partnerships and 
convening power, allowing for a multidimensional approach to policy and programming, with 
strong  links  to  both  civil  society  and  private  sector  stakeholders.  UNDP  supported  the 
development of a national action plan to address sexual and gender-based violence, 2016-2020, 
and the preparation of the 2023-2027 plan, also demonstrating leadership in disability inclusion; 
(b)  Integrated  solutions  to  Sustainable  Development  Goals  acceleration  through  improved 
planning  and  financing  –  including  Goals-aligned  budgeting,  tax  reform,  strengthening  data 
architecture, linkages across sectors such as sustainable tourism and environment, and vertical 
linkages between national and subnational levels. Since volunteer-involving organizations and 
volunteers play a crucial role in localizing the goals, such platforms and partnerships will be 
leveraged; (c) policy and thought leadership, drawing upon the UNDP Global Policy Network 
as well as country-level platforms such as the Colombo Development Dialogues, an established 
‘brand’ with policy credibility; (d) Innovation and digital-led approaches. UNDP is home to 
the first dedicated social innovation facility in South Asia – the Citra Lab, which provides space 
for  experimentation  based  on  principles  of  human-centred  design  and  systems  thinking  to 
address  complex  development  challenges,  provide  strategic  support  to  programmes  and 
advance the digital transformation agenda. UNDP is (e) an agile development partner, able to 
pilot solutions and take them to scale, as evidenced by its reaching over 2 million Sri Lankans 
to  date  through  its  Global  Environment  Facility  Small  Grants  Programme,  resettlement, 
capacity development for local government, and youth entrepreneurship and skills programmes. 
9.  The overarching theory of change of the programme suggests pathways for all people in 
Sri  Lanka,  especially  the  most  vulnerable,  to  contribute  to  and  benefit  from  inclusive  and 
sustainable  development  in  a resilient,  peaceful  and  cohesive  society.  The  pathway  to more 
inclusive  green  recovery  and  growth  comprises  evidence-based  economic  policies  that 
decouple  growth  from  environmental  degradation;  incentivize  low-carbon,  climate-sensitive 
investments;  promote  innovation,  entrepreneurship  and  decent  job  creation  for  women  and 
youth;  and  facilitate  better  access  to  financing  and  markets.  To  expand  equitable  human 
development,  social  and  economic  policies  need  to  be  augmented  by  rights-based,  better 
targeted,  higher-quality  services  to  build  the  resilience  and  socio-economic  mobility  of 
vulnerable groups. Transformation of economic and social policies will require an underpinning 
system of governance based on the rule of law which is responsive, accountable, just, and able 
3 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
to effectively perform core government functions, deliver services, and enable social cohesion. 
Strengthening  policy  development  and  (increasingly  digital)  service  delivery  capacities, 
ensuring the independence and efficacy of the judiciary, improving oversight of the branches 
of government,  and creating hate-intolerant spaces for meaningful,  constructive  engagement 
with and among the public are key elements of the pathway to greater public trust and fulfilment 
of individuals’ rights. The theory of change further suggests that the realization of potential 
development gains from the above measures will depend upon the extent to which society is 
able to increase the agency and social capital of women and marginalized groups. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
10.  The country programme seeks to address the deepening socio-political and economic crises 
and their consequences – particularly for vulnerable groups – guided by the principle of ‘leaving 
no one behind’, and to support resilient recovery and sustainable human development to limit 
regression  of  development  gains  and  minimize  backsliding  on  the  attainment  of  the  goals. 
Consultations  (facilitated  by  the  National  Planning  Department),  as  well  as  civil  society 
partners, informed the programme design.  
11.  Special attention will be paid to: (a) driving gender equality and women’s empowerment, 
across  all  outcomes  and  in  marginalized  and  rural  areas,  through  greater  participation  in 
decision-making and more equitable access to economic and natural resources; (b) a twin-track 
approach to ensuring that the rights and potential of persons with disabilities are realized by 
supporting the commitments Sri Lanka has made to differently abled and disabled people on 
rights to economic and social security and equal opportunities to improve quality of life; and 
(c) including young people as partners and agents, drawing on the Youth 2030 Strategy.  
12.  Understanding the barriers faced by vulnerable individuals, groups and geographical areas, 
and prioritizing support for actions to ensure that needs and rights are addressed, will be central 
to the country programme. The programme takes a crisis-prevention and risk-informed, agile 
approach,  given  past  challenges,  future  uncertainties,  the  unprecedented  scale  of  the  current 
socio-economic situation, and the converging crises.   
13.  The  country  programme  will  build  on  the  comparative  advantages  of  UNDP  as  it 
contributes  to  the  UNSDCF  within  three  broad  priority  areas:  Social  inclusion  and 
macroeconomic stability; Green development and Inclusive governance and justice, peace and 
social cohesion. 
Social inclusion and macroeconomic stability (outcome 1)  
14.  UNDP will substantially increase its support to alleviating the human development impact 
of the socio-economic crises and will support immediate relief and recovery efforts. With the 
United  Nations  Children’s  Fund  and  the  United  Nations  results  group  on  social  protection, 
UNDP will provide support to expanding social protection coverage for effective relief, and 
building resilience. Strengthening livelihoods will be a key focus, and, in collaboration with the 
World  Food  Programme  and  the  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization,  UNDP  will  address 
impacts on food security, water security and agricultural production. This will include a life-
cycle approach and horizontal expansion of social protection schemes, linking them to ‘cash+’ 
approaches that generate livelihoods and assets.  
15.  To minimize negative impacts on human development, macroeconomic policies must be 
designed  to  strengthen  resilience  to  shocks  and  prevent  the  erosion  of  development  gains 
achieved.  UNDP will support the design of policy options for inclusive  economic recovery, 
enabling  public  and  private  financing  for  the  goals,  including  nature-positive  financing, 
climate/Goals  budgeting,  and  innovative  financing  options  such  as  debt-for-nature  swaps, 
green/blue  bonds,  and  market  intelligence  on  Sustainable  Development  Goals  investment 
opportunities.  For  more  diverse  economic  opportunities  for  women  and  youth,  UNDP  will 
leverage  the  Citra  Social  Innovation  Lab  to  support  digital  transformation  and  create  an 
4 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
enabling business environment for entrepreneurship with national and subnational institutions 
and the private sector.  
Green development (outcome 2) 
16.  Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction will be integrated into development 
plans in line with Nationally Determined Contributions, with the priority of addressing losses 
and damage at national and local levels while  ensuring translation into budgets and actions. 
Building  on  the  long-lasting  partnership  with  the  Government,  development  and  funding 
partners, and the private sector, the focus will be on strengthening the resilience of vulnerable 
communities, particularly in the dry and intermediate zones, and supporting women and youth-
led enterprises, especially in the tourism value chain. 
17.  UNDP will leverage its thought-leadership and provision of integrated solutions in climate, 
nature and energy towards green development through support to implementation of Nationally 
Determined  Contributions,  including  gender  standards,  the  National  Climate  Policy,  and 
development of a ‘2050 Carbon Neutrality Roadmap’. Green principles will be integrated into 
the  economic  recovery  process  through  a  unified  multisectoral  partner  platform  for  green 
development,  under  the  leadership  of  the  ministries  of  environment,  finance,  energy  and 
economy – together with relevant United Nations entities; development partners, including the 
Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund; the private sector; and civil society 
organizations.  In  response  to  the  energy  crisis,  UNDP  will  facilitate  a  consultative  process, 
based on innovation and research, to enhance energy resilience and self-sufficiency. UNDP-led 
integrated programmes in chemical and health-care waste management, sustainable tourism and 
agriculture,  renewable  energy,  greening  of  the  transport  sector,  and  the  phase-out of ozone-
depleting substances will support the green transition. 
Inclusive governance, justice, peace and social cohesion (outcomes 3 and 4) 
18.  This priority area will be implemented through the UNDP flagship portfolio on Goal 16 to 
address inequitable service delivery and capacity gaps; strengthen the efficacy and digitally-
driven  efficiency  of  key  institutions  to  deliver  people-centred  services  with  a  gender  lens; 
improve key governance functions; and promote peace and social cohesion through anticipatory 
and  adaptive  governance.  It  will  address  negative  social  trends,  including  hate  speech,  and 
harness  opportunities  that  emerge  from  technology  and  social  media.  Early  warning 
mechanisms will be strengthened to facilitate conflict prevention and sensitivity, including on 
managing environmental resource-based conflicts at the local level. 
19.  Evidence-based, innovative and consultative policy formulation and implementation will 
be promoted at the national and subnational levels. UNDP will engage key oversight institutions 
such  as  the  Parliament  and  commissions  to  facilitate  people’s  participation  in  governance 
processes  and  strengthen  recourse  to  remedy  grievances.  To  address  the  lack  of  women’s 
participation in political processes, special attention will be paid to supporting women leaders, 
including the local councillors. UNDP’s flagship programme on local governance, funded by 
the  European  Union,  will  strengthen  capacities  of  decentralized  and  devolved  structures  by 
promoting  horizontal  and  vertical  development  planning,  localization  of  the  Goals,  and 
effective, inclusive and people-centred service delivery. 
20.  To  strengthen  the  rule  of  law  and  contribute  to  an  accountable  and  responsive  justice 
system, UNDP prioritizes justice sector reform, building on its long-standing partnership with 
the  Ministry  of  Justice,  supported  by  European  Union  and  in  collaboration  with  the 
United Nations  Children’s  Fund.  Focus  areas  include:  rights  awareness  and  representation; 
transparency of the justice sector; strengthened data capabilities; efficiency, coordination and 
capacity of a broad range of justice actors to advance legislative and policy reform; and judicial 
modernization  in  line  with  international  standards  and  best  practices.  Victim-centric  and 
gender-responsive  legal  services  will  be  promoted,  including  for  sexual  and  gender-based 
violence survivors, through victim and witness protection, legal aid, and continued support to 
5 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
strengthening women’s shelters. While the COVID-19 pandemic may have accelerated the use 
of digital technologies, a more strategic, whole-of-society shift towards digital transformation 
is required to bridge gaps in public service provision, improve efficiency, and provide better 
access for women and girls. 
21.  The  previous  country  programme  evaluation  suggested  a  more  active  engagement  with 
civil society, including enhancement of civic space and promotion of participation at all levels. 
This will be pursued,  along with platforms for social dialogue and volunteering. UNDP will 
support  disability  inclusion  and  mainstreaming  of  official  languages  to  promote  voice  and 
representation. 
22.  An  area-based  approach  will  be  adopted,  in  collaboration  with  other  United  Nations 
entities, to ensure integrated solutions. Its geographical focus will include the north, east, dry, 
intermediate  and  southern  zones,  where  pockets  of  severe  poverty  persist  (outcome  1)  and 
where  people  are  most  vulnerable  to  the  effects  of  climate  change  (outcome  2).  This  will 
contribute  to  addressing  factors  that  could  lead  to  social  tensions  and  elevate  conflict  risk 
through additional stress on resource allocation, management and scarcity (outcome 4). Inter-
community  tensions  and  conflict  incidence  directly  contributing  to  physical  and  economic 
insecurity, with women at greater risk of violence and disempowerment (outcome 3), will also 
be  addressed.  As  the  single  largest  development  partner  supporting  refugee  communities 
returning  to  their  lands,  UNDP,  in  collaboration  with  the  International  Organization  for 
Migration, will continue  to support resettlement, embedding it in local development. UNDP 
will pursue strengthened environmental protection and natural resource management, including 
renewable  energy  and  sustainable  tourism  linked  to  the  outcome  2  objectives  on  green-led 
economic development and improved livelihoods (outcome 1).  
III.  Programme and risk management  
23.  UNDP will provide active leadership to Cooperation Framework Outcome Results Groups 
3 and 4 and will guide joint planning, monitoring, and reporting, including through to the Joint 
Steering Committee. Annual planning and multi-year goal-setting for the country programme 
will  be  undertaken  in  partnership  with  the  Government,  through  the  establishment  of  a 
programme  board  as  the  governance  mechanism.  Implementation  will  benefit  from  a  civil 
society advisory committee. Given the fluid circumstances in the country, UNDP will ensure 
continuous monitoring of the theory of change for variations in its key underlying assumptions, 
as well as robust programme management mechanisms to adapt to consequential changes in the 
development context. Closely aligned with the Cooperation Framework which will be reviewed 
annually, a substantive midterm review will be undertaken, to ensure that the strategic focus is 
calibrated to the needs of Sri Lanka as it emerges from multiple crises. 
24.  With the deepening of internal fractures due to socio-economic crises with concomitant 
political  dislocations,  the  possibility  of  increased  inter-community  tensions,  violence  and 
uprisings due to social instability presents risks to social cohesion. UNDP will test, review and 
update  contingency  plans;  revise  and  upscale  the  use  of  the  United  Nations  crisis  risk 
dashboard;  and  apply  scenario  planning,  foresight  based  on  political  economy,  and  conflict 
analyses to modify or scale up existing programmes to mitigate escalation.  
25.  Natural and climate-induced disasters, as well as future  COVID-19 outbreaks or other 
pandemics, may affect the ability of communities and local stakeholders to stay engaged in 
development  initiatives.  Mitigating  actions  will  include  disaster  preparedness  and  business 
continuity  planning  for  uninterrupted  programme  delivery  developed  with  United  Nations 
partners, government, civil society, and communities.  
26.  To  ensure  financial  sustainability,  UNDP  will  build  on  ongoing  successful  partner 
relationships and diversify partnerships through the Partnership and Communications Action 
Plan  operationalized  in  2020.  A  programme  pipeline  of  strategic,  gender  transformative 
6 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
(‘GEN 3’), innovative and operational engagements will be developed to advance the priorities 
identified.  UNDP  will  review  its  business  processes  to  improve  efficiency  and  cost 
effectiveness, including a staffing structure with appropriate capacities, in line with the new 
enterprise resource platforms and global clustering initiatives.  
27.  UNDP  will  proactively  engage  with  the  United  Nations  Country  Team  to  evaluate  and 
address emerging issues, anticipating changes in development and financial circumstances that 
may require programme and budgetary adjustments. As seen during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
UNDP  has  a  track  record of building flexibility  and  gender-responsiveness  into  programme 
design and implementation, leveraging digital solutions and developing new ways of working. 
The dynamism of the Sri Lanka development context will require continued agility to respond 
to changes. UNDP will monitor the underlying assumptions/risks of the programme and ensure 
readiness for necessary adjustments. 
28.  The  envisioned  portfolio  management  approach  will  enhance  integration,  creating  an 
effective policy-practice nexus with field-work feedback loops; promote effective collaboration 
between  teams,  including  between  programme  and  operations;  and  ensure  the  best  use  of 
available  resources.  UNDP  will  apply  the  revised  social  and  environmental  standards  to 
enhance  programme  quality,  and  the  enterprise  risk  management  policy  to  conduct  regular 
quality assurance and risk assessments throughout the  programme cycle. UNDP will ensure 
that at least 15 per cent of programme expenditures are dedicated to initiatives where gender 
equality is a principal objective (‘GEN 3’). 
29.  This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework. 
30.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme in response to force majeure. The 
Harmonized  Approach  to  Cash  Transfers  will  be  used  in  a  coordinated  fashion  with  other 
United  Nations  entities  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and  classifications  for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
31.  The results and resources framework will serve as the main accountability framework, with 
programme  outcome  and  output  indicators  and  requisite  targets.  As  recommended  by  the 
programme evaluation, UNDP will embed a robust evidence-based monitoring and evaluation 
system in the programme and its projects, combining qualitative and quantitative data, and will 
solicit citizen and beneficiary feedback to validate impact.  
32.  UNDP will work with the  Ministry of Finance (Departments of External Resources and 
National Planning) and other government institutions to ensure  the  involvement of national 
counterparts and beneficiaries in planning, monitoring and evaluation processes. 
33.  To facilitate data collection and analysis for monitoring the programme, UNSDCF, and the 
Goals,  UNDP  and  its  United  Nations  partners  will  support  efforts  to  strengthen  national 
statistical systems, reinforce results-based processes, and utilize innovative data collection and 
monitoring methods to identify and better target those left behind and capture transformative 
results.  
34.  Recognizing the need for additional data sources, UNDP will utilize national data systems 
– including the UNDP-supported national ‘SDG Data Portal’, to the extent possible – to monitor 
progress. Indicators are aligned to targets of the Goals and the UNDP Strategic Plan, gender 
strategy  and  parity  strategy. UNDP  will  address  data  limitations  associated  with  results  and 
7 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
resources framework indicators through baseline studies. Guided by the country office gender 
strategy  and  gender  action  plan,  UNDP  will  use  gender  analysis,  the  gender  marker  and 
gender-responsive indicators to plan and monitor gender-related investments and results.  
35.  Knowledge  management  systems  will  identify  best  practices  –  including  from  UNDP 
globally  –  promote  synergies,  and  facilitate  joint  learning  with  implementing  partners  and 
beneficiaries.  Projects  will  engage  beneficiaries,  particularly  women,  youth  and  vulnerable 
groups, in development solutions, monitoring and learning. 
36.  UNDP will allocate at least 3 per cent of the programme budget, proportionately charged 
to  projects,  to  cover  monitoring,  evaluation  and  communication  expenses.  The  costed 
evaluation plan indicates key project, programme and thematic evaluations to be undertaken to 
ensure learning and accountability.  
 
8 
22-10279 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Sri Lanka (2023-2027) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: All people in Sri Lanka, especially the most vulnerable, contribute to and benefit from inclusive, just, sustainable and rights-based development, in a resilient, peaceful 
and cohesive society, leading to achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  
UNSDCF OUTCOME 2/UNDP OUTCOME 1. By 2027, more people in Sri Lanka, particularly youth and the most vulnerable, have equitable, decent, just work and income opportunities, and 
benefit from and contribute to inclusive, gender-transformative, resilient and green-led economic recovery, growth and diversification. 
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development 
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME 
(in $ thousands) 
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
 COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATORS, 
BASELINES, TARGETS 
 INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS  
MAJOR PARTNERS / PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS  
Regular: 838 
Indicator: Proportion of population 
living below the national poverty line  
Baseline: National: 14.3%  
Male 14.5% 
Female 14.2% 
(Updated poverty line – 2019) 
Target: Less than 14% 
Ministries of: Finance; Youth, Sports, and 
related agencies; Technology 
State Ministries of: Samurdhi, Home 
Economy, Microfinance, Self-Employment, 
Business Development and Underutilized 
State Resources 
Output 1.1. Structural transformation and 
policy options for inclusive, SDG-aligned 
green economic recovery designed, financed 
and implemented 
 
Department of Census and Statistics 
(DCS) Household Income and 
Expenditure Survey 
Other: 15,000 
 
 
 
1.1.1 Number of functional multi-stakeholder 
platforms and dialogues that advance integrated 
development considerations/solutions  
Baseline (2021): 7 
Target (2027): 49 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
DCS computer literacy statistics/ 
annual 
Skills Development; Vocational Education, 
Research and Innovation, and related 
agencies 
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Proportion of youth and 
adults with information and 
communications technology skills 
Baseline (national): 32.3% (2020) 
Target: 35% 
 
Department of National Planning 
Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
Prime Minister’s Office 
National Innovation Agency 
Sustainable Development Council 
Information and Communication 
Technology Agency  
United Nations Global Compact 
Civil society organizations (CSOs)  
 
 
 
1.1.2 Number of institutions with enhanced 
technical capacity for SDG-aligned planning, 
implementation, monitoring and financing  
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2027): 6 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Proportion of informal 
employment in (a) total employment, 
by sex (b) non-agricultural employment 
Baseline:  
(a) 67% (2020) 
Male 60.1% 
Female 70.4% 
(b) 57.9% 
Target:  
(a) 65% 
(b) 53% 
 
 
 
 
Output 1.2. Social protection system 
strengthened to mitigate adverse impacts 
of the economic crisis on the poor and 
vulnerable 
DCS Labour Force Survey/Annual 
 
 
1.2.1 Number of policy recommendations for 
reform approved for improved social protection 
services  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 2 
Source/Frequency: Ministry of 
Samurdhi/Annual  
 
Indicator: Unemployment rate, by sex 
Baseline: 5.5% (2020) 
Male 4.0% 
Female 8.5% 
Target: Less than 5% 
 
1.2.2 A robust system in place to support 
digitalization of social protection services 
 
 
9 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
Baseline: None 
Target (2027): Digitalized payments 
Source/Frequency: Ministry of 
Samurdhi/Annual  
 
Output 1.3. Access to future-oriented skills 
and livelihoods opportunities increased, in 
particular for women 
 
1.3.1 Percentage of women-led micro, small and 
medium enterprises  
Baseline (2021): 10% 
Target (2027): 30% 
Source/Frequency: DCS/Annual  
 
1.3.2 Number of people and institutions in the 
entrepreneurship ecosystem with enhanced 
capacities, disaggregated by gender, youth and 
persons with disabilities (PWDs) 
Baseline (2021): 
Institutions: 1 
People: 8,725 
Youth 4,140 
Women 1,817 
Men 6,908 
PWDs 57 
Target(2027):  
Institutions: 15 
People: 25,000 
- 
-  Women 12,500 
-  Men 12,500 
- 
PWDs 500 
Youth 25,000 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
 
Output 1.4. Strengthened systems and 
institutions to support Sri Lanka’s digital 
transformation and innovation  
 
1.4.1 Number of institutions/partners (including 
women-led and gender focused institutions) 
capacitated to apply digital technologies, 
innovation approaches and tools 
Baseline (2021): 10 
Target (2027):100 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
 
10 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
1.4.2 Number of institutions collaborated and 
partnered with to increase digital and innovation 
capabilities 
Baseline (2021): 10 
Target (2027): 125 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Adopt a green development strategy with specific focus on green agriculture, energy, construction, green villages, cities and green employment for the sustainable 
development of Sri Lanka. 
UNSDCF OUTCOME 3/UNDP OUTCOME 2. By 2027, people and communities in Sri Lanka, especially the vulnerable and marginalized, are more resilient to climate change and disaster risks, 
have enhanced water and food security, and equitably benefit from ambitious climate action and increasingly sustainable management and protection of the environment and natural resources. 
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions 
Indicator: Degree of integrated water 
resources management implementation 
(0-100) 
Baseline: 47/100 (2020) 
Target: 62/100 
UNEP Integrated Water Resources 
Management: Tracking SDG 6 
series 
Output 2.1. Development, financing and 
implementation of pro-poor, inclusive green 
growth policies strengthened. 
Regular: 400 
Ministries of: Environment; Tourism; 
Plantation; Irrigation; Agriculture; 
Fisheries; Provincial Councils and 
Local Government; Power; Wildlife 
and Forest Conservation; Water 
Supply; Health; Industries; Finance; 
Transport  
Other: 55,700 
 
 
International Energy Agency: 
Tracking SDG7 – Energy Progress 
Report 
2.1.1 Number of green development policy 
initiatives developed 
Baseline (2022): 3 
Target (2027): 6 
Source/Frequency: Ministry of Finance/Annual 
 
 
Indicator: Renewable energy share in 
the total final energy consumption 
Baseline:  43.1% (2019) 
Target: At least 65% 
 
Sri Lanka Tourism Development 
Authority  
Sustainable Energy Authority 
State Ministry of Disaster 
Management 
Presidential Task Force on Creating a 
Green Sri Lanka  
Marine Environment Protection 
Authority 
Coast Conservation Department 
Bi- and multi-lateral partners 
Private sector 
CSOs 
  
Sendai Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction, 2015-2030 – Sri 
Lanka country action plan 
 
2.1.2  Number of people benefiting from 
blue/green investments supported by UNDP  
Baseline (2022): Male 60,000 Female 61,200 
Target(2027): Male: 147,000 
Female: 153,000 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual 
 
Indicator: Number of  
(a)  Deaths 
(b)  Directly affected persons 
 
 
 
(attributed to disasters) 
 
Baseline: (2015) 
(a) 152 
(b) 186,162 
Target: (2030) 
(a) 76 
(b) 93,081 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.2. Policies introduced, solutions 
implemented for enhanced food and water 
security and strengthened climate and 
disaster resilience.  
 
Sri Lanka Forest reference-level 
submissions to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate 
Change/Nationally Determined 
Contributions  
 
 
 
 
2.2.1 Number of people benefiting from food 
and water security, Climate Change Adaptation 
(CCA) and disaster risk reduction investments in 
line with NDCs 
Baseline (2022): 770,500 (49% men, 
51% women, 25% youth, 10% PWDs) 
Target (2027): 1,200,000 (49% men, 
51% women, 25% youth, 10% PWDs) 
Source/Frequency: Ministry Report/Annual  
Indicator: Forest area as a proportion 
of total land area 
Baseline:  29.15% (2015) 
Target: At least 30% 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Total greenhouse gas 
emissions per year 
Baseline: 1.02 tonnes per person 
(2010) 
 
 
11 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
Target: At least a 10% reduction 
relative to ‘business as usual’  
2.2.2  Number  of  sectoral  climate  change 
adaptation  strategies  including  disaster  damage 
and loss reduction solutions implemented in line 
with NDCs 
Baseline (2022):1 
Target (2027):3 
Source/Frequency: National 
Communications/bi-annual 
 
2.2.3 Number of national programmes that adopt 
or scale up CCA models promoted by UNDP 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): 4 
Source/Frequency: Ministry reports /Bi-annual 
 
Output 2.3. Sustainable natural resource 
management, biodiversity conservation and 
ecosystem services improved through 
innovative partnerships and investment 
solutions.  
 
2.3.1 Number of innovative financing 
initiatives/investment leveraged for natural 
resources management 
Baseline (2022): 3 
Target (2027):  6 
Source/Frequency: Biodiversity 
Secretariat/Annual 
 
2.3.2 Terrestrial and marine protected areas 
created or under improved management for 
conservation and sustainable use  
Baseline (2022): 
Terrestrial220,000 Ha 
Marine 45,000 Ha 
Target (2027):  
Terrestrial425,000Ha 
Marine area 150,000Ha 
Source/Frequency: Biodiversity 
Secretariat/Annual 
 
2.3.3 Number of tourism destinations applying 
for and receiving sustainability certification 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 5 
Source/Frequency: Sri Lanka Tourism 
Development Authority/Annual  
 
12 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
 
Output 2.4. National institutions have the 
technical capacities for effective gender-
responsive NDC implementation. 
 
2.4.1 Extent to which capacities of key 
stakeholders for mainstreaming gender in 
climate actions improved5 
Baseline (2022): 2 
Target (2027): 6 
 
Source/Frequency: Climate Change 
Secretariat/Annual  
 
 
2.4.2 Number of gender-responsive sectoral 
NDC implementation plans. 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 3 
Source/Frequency: National 
Communications/Bi-annual  
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Reforms in relation to good governance are associated with efficient public sector management, cultivating social responsibility in the private sector, and enhanced 
efficiency in legal and judicial services towards democratic rule. 
UNSDCF OUTCOME 4/UNDP OUTCOME 3. By 2027, people in Sri Lanka, particularly the most vulnerable, have increased trust and confidence to claim and benefit from enhanced, non-
discriminatory, gender-responsive, participatory and efficient governance and justice systems and rights-based development. 
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions 
Indicator: Proportion of victims of 
violence in the previous 12 months who 
reported victimization to competent 
authorities or other officially 
recognized conflict-resolution 
mechanisms. 
Baseline: Available July 2022 
Target: To be determined once 
baseline in place 
UNDP Justice Reform Programme 
Output 3.1. Accountability, 
efficiency, inclusivity and 
responsiveness of governance 
mechanisms, public institutions and 
systems improved 
Parliament 
Ministries of: Public Services; 
Defence; Justice; Public Security; 
Women & Child Affairs 
Regular: 300 
 
Other: 27,000 
 
 
 
 
Provincial councils 
Local government bodies 
District secretariats 
Municipal and urban councils 
Ceylon Chamber of Commerce 
Private sector  
CSOs 
Academia 
Chief Justice 
Judicial Service Commission 
 
 
 
3.1.1 Score of parliamentary 
‘open budget’ functions increased  
 
 
  
 
 
Baseline (2019)  
Transparency: 47/100 
Public participation: 17/100 
Budget oversight: 50/100 
 
 
Indicator: Un-sentenced detainees as a 
proportion of overall prison population 
Baseline: 66.4% (2018) 
Target: Less than 50% 
Prison Statistics of Sri Lanka 
 
 
  
 
5 Rating scale: 0=no capacity, 10=full capacity. Capacity measured based on number of officials trained on gender, ability of officials to describe and incorporate gender dimensions into plans and programmes, 
and level of gender mainstreamed in policies, strategies and plans. 
 
13 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
Joint validation with Sustainable Development 
Council 
Attorney General’s Department 
Official Languages Department 
Judicial Medical Service 
Legal Draftsman’s Department 
Sri Lanka Police 
Victim and Witness Protection 
Authority 
Prisons Department 
Legal Aid Commission 
Human Rights Commission 
National Police Commission 
Bar Association of Sri Lanka 
National SDG16 Committee 
Bi- and multilateral partners 
Target (2027): 
Transparency: 50/100  
Public participation: 20/100  
Budget oversight: 55/100 
 
 
Indicator: Proportion of sustainable 
development indicators produced at 
national level with full disaggregation 
when relevant to the target, in 
accordance with the fundamental 
principles of official statistics 
Baseline: 34% (2021) 
Target: 75% 
 
 
 
 
Source/Frequency: Open Budget 
Survey/Annual  
 
 
 
 
3.1.2 Percentage of users satisfied with 
the quality of services provided by 
public institutions 
Baseline: 44%  
Target: 70% 
Source/Frequency: UNDP Service 
Satisfaction survey/Annual  
 
 
 
 
Indicator: Corruption Perception Index 
score 
Baseline: 37 (2021) 
Target: At least 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transparency International 
Output 3.2 Participatory and SDG-
driven national and subnational level 
public policy planning and 
implementation strengthened 
 
 
3.2.1 Number of public consultations 
held during policy formulation at 
subnational level 
Baseline/target/source: To be 
calculated by end June 
 
3.2.2 Number of subnational 
development plans that mainstreamed 
SDG-16, gender and climate 
vulnerability 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 4  
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
Output 3.3. Justice sector reform 
aligned with international standards 
advanced 
 
 
3.3.1 Number of laws, policies and 
procedures aligned with international 
standards adopted  
Baseline (2022): 3  
Target (2023): 10  
Source/Frequency: Ministry of 
Justice/Annual  
 
14 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
3.3.2 Percentage of persons receiving 
free legal and protection assistance  
Baseline (2021): 40% 
Target (2027): 65% 
Source/Frequency: Ministry of 
Justice/ Annual 
 
Output 3.4. Legal framework and 
institutional capacities strengthened 
for protection against sexual and 
gender-based violence (SGBV)  
 
3.4.1 Number of sector ministries 
implementing plans to address SGBV  
Baseline: 13 
Target: 18 
Source/frequency: Ministry of Women 
Development/Annual  
 
3.4.2 Extent to which the legal 
framework addressing SGBV is 
implemented6  
Baseline: 1 
Target: 3 
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual   
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY: Promote peaceful, cohesive and inclusive societies for sustainable development. 
UNSDCF OUTCOME 5/UNDP OUTCOME 4. By 2027, the people of Sri Lanka live in a society which is more cohesive and strengthened by transformative and rights-based processes and 
mechanisms which support peaceful coexistence and human rights for all. 
STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3. Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization  
Indicator: Extent to which (a) global 
citizenship education; and (b) education 
for sustainable development, including 
gender equality and human rights, are 
mainstreamed in (a) national education 
policies; (b) curricula; (c) teacher 
education; and (d) student assessment 
Baseline: TBD (2022) 
Target: TBD 
Regular: 250 
Output 4.1. Implementation of 
national and subnational policies and 
processes relating to post-conflict 
recovery, resettlement and social 
cohesion advanced 
Private sector  
Office of National Unity 
and Reconciliation  
CSOs 
Media institutions 
Think tanks 
Ministry of Women and 
Child Affairs 
Provincial Land 
Commissioner – North 
Ministry of Youth 
Affairs 
Other: 11,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.1.1 Percentage of targeted population 
reporting increased confidence and trust 
in processes  
Baseline (2019): 14%  
Target (2027): 30%  
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 Rating scale: 2=partial (50%-75%); 3=moderate (75%-90%);4=largely (90% and above) 
 
15 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
Indicator: Existence of an independent 
national human rights institution in 
compliance with Paris principles 
Baseline: ‘A’ status –  Fully compliant 
with the Paris Principles (2021) 
Target: ‘A’ status – Fully compliant 
with the Paris principles  
Global Alliance for National Human Rights 
Institutions  
Community-based 
organizations 
Universities 
National Youth Services 
Council 
Local government 
authorities 
Bi- and multilateral 
partners 
 
4.1.27 Extent to which response among 
public institutions on drivers of social 
tension and violence is improved 
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2027): 3  
Source/Frequency: Institutional 
survey/Annual  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Right to Information Commission of Sri Lanka 
 
 
Indicator: Percentage of requests for 
information submitted under the Right 
to Information Act furnished within 
relevant legislated time frames. 
Baseline: 19.7%  
Target: 75% 
Output 4.2. Social tensions better 
managed through inclusive, gender-
integrated community processes and 
early warning/response 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2.1 Number of early warning 
reports/analysis generated by UNDP 
and shared across multiple stakeholder 
platforms 
Baseline(2022): 4 
Target(2027): 10  
Source/Frequency: UNDP/Annual 
 
 
4.2.2: Number of institutions and CSOs 
that actively engage in managing social 
tensions 
Baseline(2022): 6 
Target(2027): 15 
Source/Frequency: UNDP 
Survey/Annual 
 
Output 4.3. Civil society and media 
empowered to advance social 
cohesion 
 
4.3.1 Percentage of civil society and 
media organizations reporting 
availability of an enabling environment 
for social cohesion and civic space  
Baseline(2022): 0%  
Target(2027): 15%  
Source/Frequency: UNDP /Annual   
 
Output 4.4 Women leaders 
empowered to represent, address 
issues affecting conflict and violence 
 
7 Rating scale; 2=partial (50%-75%); 3=moderate (75%-90%); 4=largely (90% and above) 
 
16 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/LKA/4 
 
 
in reconciliation and accountability 
processes and mechanisms  
 
4.4.1 Percentage of women leaders in 
executive positions in district 
reconciliation committees  
Baseline(2022): 5%  
Target(2027): 30%  
Source/Frequency: District Secretariat 
data/Annual 
 
4.4.2 Percentage of claims for service 
provision made by women leaders 
supported through UNDP interventions 
on addressing socio-economic, 
reconciliation issues and SGBV 
Baseline: 10% 
Target: 50% 
Source/Frequency: UNDP  
report/Annual 
 
 
 
17 
22-10279 
 
 
 
 
 
