United Nations 

Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the  
United Nations Office for  
Project Services 

DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Distr.: General 
7 December 2022 

Original: English 

First regular session 2023 
30 January – 3 February 2023, New York 
Item 7 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters 

Country programme document for Algeria (2023–2027) 

Contents 

Chapter  

I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .................  

II.  Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….… 

III.  Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 

IV.  Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….…………………… 

Annex 

Page 

2 

4 

7 

8 

Results and resources framework for Algeria (2023–2027)...................................................................  

10 

22-27872X (E)    121222 
*2227872* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development 

Cooperation Framework 

1.  Algeria, a middle-income country, is engaged in major economic, political1 and 
environmental reforms. The Human Development Index value of 0.745 (96 out of 
191 countries2) is a testament of the considerable progress made across all human 
development  indicators.  The  road  map  to  the  “New  Algeria”  shaped  a  new 
Constitution and legislative elections, followed by local and municipal elections. 
Due to  the amendment of the electoral law,  the  new legislature (2021-2026)  has 
recorded  a  significant  increase  in  youth  representation,  with  135  of  the  407 
members of parliament under the age of 40.  

2.  The  country’s  socioeconomic  model  is  based  on  universal  access  to  social 
services  sustained  by  subsidized  commodities  and  services  (e.g.,  water,  gas, 
electricity, housing rental). In 2020,3 the global drop in oil prices compounded by 
the  impact  of  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  pandemic  resulted  in  a 
contraction of the gross domestic product (GDP) by 5.1 per cent. The economic 
situation  remains  challenging  with  soaring  food  prices  and  no  increase  in 
employment opportunities.4 However, signs of recovery appeared in 2021 with a 
significant  increase  of  the  GDP  by  3.8 per  cent5.  Decade-high  energy  prices  are 
fortifying  the  economic  recovery,  external  and  fiscal  balances  and  spurring new 
hydrocarbon investment.  

3.  Given  the  Algerian  commitment  to  achieve  the  Sustainable  Development 
Goals,  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  Framework 
(UNSDCF) 2023-2027 represents an ambitious blueprint for the collective efforts 
of  the  United  Nations.  UNDP  contributes  to  an  important  share  of  the  United 
Nations development system’s outcomes in terms of both volume of investment 
and  its  substantive,  forward-looking  approach.  Guided  by  the  Government’s 
Action Plan 2021-2024 and the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, UNDP Algeria 
pledges to contribute to outcomes 1, 2 and 4 of the UNSDCF. 

4.  The national strategy for biodiversity and its action plan calls for the protection 
of biodiversity for sustainable economic and social development and adaptation to 
climate change. Through the intended nationally determined contribution, Algeria 
has committed to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by between 7 and 22 per cent 
by 2030, of which 7 per cent will be financed through national resources and the 
remaining  15  per  cent  through  the  international  financial  channel.  This  is  an 
important milestone for a country with an economic model based on hydrocarbons. 
Algeria has a relatively low share of global greenhouse gas emissions and yet is 
ranked 39 of the 58 countries that produce 90 per cent of global emissions. Given 
its  comparative  advantage  in  providing  solutions  for  public  policies  related  to 
nature and climate, UNDP will focus on reinforcing institutional capacities for the 
preservation of the environment and the fight against climate change. 

5.  As a result of the country’s development progress and economic growth, energy 
consumption has increased exponentially during the last 20 years. According to the 
Ministry of Energy and Mines, energy consumption increased from 31.6 million 
tons  of  oil  equivalent  in  2010  to  50.4  million  in  2019.  The  Algerian  nationally 
determined contributions aim at reducing consumption of electric energy by 9 per 
cent and increasing the share of renewable energy in the production of electricity 
to 27 per cent (currently 1 per cent) by 2030. With over two decades of experience 
in promoting sustainable energy solutions globally, UNDP is strongly positioned 

1 The Government’s action plan for the implementation of the Programme of the President of the Republic, published in September 2021. 
2 UNDP, 2020. Human Development Report 2022. Uncertain Times, Unsettled Lives. hdr2021-22pdf_1.pdf (undp.org) 
3 World Bank, 2021. Algeria Economic Update – April 2021. 
www.worldbank.org/en/country/algeria/publication/economic-update-april-2021 
4 Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) (modeled ILO estimate) - Algeria | Data (worldbank.org) 
5 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.KD.ZG?locations=DZ 

2 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

within the United Nations development system to contribute to defining the national 
energy transformation road map by catalysing technical expertise, notably on the 
transition energy models and related regulatory framework. 

6.  While  Algeria  has  made  remarkable  progress  in  improving  girls’  access  to 
education,6  access  to  decent  employment  needs  to  be  increased.  The  rate  of 
women’s  participation  in  the  formal  sector  is  around  12  per  cent7  and  their 
unemployment rate is double that of men (22.1 per cent compared to 10.4 per cent)8 
in 2021. A considerable percentage of the young population working in the private 
sector are not affiliated with the social security system; in 2014, this was the case 
for 88.2 per cent of workers aged 15–24.9 As highlighted by the 2019  voluntary 
national  review10  and  the  government  action  plan,  the  priorities  related  to  equal 
access  to  quality  services,  formal  employment  and  social  protection  need  to  be 
underpinned by sustainable public policies and investments that promote inclusive 
and  sustained  implementation  efforts  to  achieve  the  Sustainable  Development 
Goals. Through its democratic governance and economic diversification portfolios, 
UNDP is ideally placed to support the Government in these fields. 

7.  The  response  to  the  COVID–19  crisis  is  a  national  priority  and  includes 
measures  to  strengthen  the  health  system  and  the  implementation  of  economic 
recovery  reforms,  focusing  on  economic  and  social  protection  measures  of 
households  and  micro,  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (MSMEs).  UNDP 
expertise on the matter is anchored in the principle of enhancing the resilience of 
public health system capacities as a vector for lasting recovery. UNDP technically 
led the socioeconomic response plan to COVID-19 in Algeria, leveraging the wider 
competencies of the United Nations system to inform public policy solutions.  

8.  UNDP will build on its legacy and achievements of its 2016-2022 programme, 
which, as underlined by its evaluation, contributed with compelling results to: (a) 
the elaboration of sectoral strategies (e.g., national strategy for the development of 
fishing and aquaculture, a draft national strategy to prevent and fight corruption); 
(b) the strengthening of Algerian institutional capacities (e.g., the wilayas of Adrar 
and  Médea  were  capacitated  to  support  youth  employment,  and  as  part  of  the 
Participatory Democracy and Local Development  (“CapDel”) programme, seven 
municipalities elaborated communal development plans); and (c) the advancement 
of  gender  equality  (e.g.,  over  800  locally  elected  women  were  trained  in  12 
wilayas).  

9.  In response to national priorities for stronger citizen participation in the social, 
economic  and  political  life  of  the  country,  UNDP,  in  partnership  with  the  line 
ministries,  will  pursue  initiatives  to  strengthen  socioeconomic  participation, 
inclusive  local  development  and  the  transparency  and  accountability  of  public 
institutions that are essential to localizing the Sustainable Development Goals for a 
peaceful and inclusive society.  

10. Across  the  entire  programme,  and  in  collaboration  with  the  United  Nations 
country  team,  UNDP  will  support  government  efforts  to  enhance  international 
cooperation through sharing of good practices and lessons learned, as part of South-
South  and  triangular  cooperation.  An  agreement  with  the  Algerian  Agency  for 
International  Cooperation,  Solidarity  and  Development  will  outline  the  actions 
towards those objectives. To that end, UNDP will deploy technical expertise and 
support  technical  capacities  related  to  economic  diplomacy,  regional  economic 

6UNESCO Institute for Statistics : Algeria (http://uis.unesco.org/en/country/dz?theme=education-and-literacy) 
7 World Bank, data, Algeria (https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.EMP.TOTL.SP.FE.ZS?locations=DZ)  
8 World Bank, data, Algeria (https://data.worldbank.org/country/DZ)  
9 National Statistics Office. Enquête emploi auprès des ménages. 2014.  (www.ons.dz/IMG/pdf/Emploi2014.pdf) 
10 See https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/memberstates/algeria 

3 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

development,  circular  migration  and  the  promotion  of  sustainable  peace  and 
security. 

11. The  integrated  support  of  UNDP  for  implementation  of  the  UNSDCF  will 
to  advance  cross-sectoral  policies  and  evidence-based 
include  expertise 
programming, data analysis and demand-driven services to national partners and 
the United Nations country team (UNCT). In line with the Strategic Plan, 2022-
2025, UNDP will help drive change via three strategic enablers: (a) development 
financing,  by  leveraging  comprehensive  financing  in  pursuit  of  all  Sustainable 
Development  Goals;  (b)  digitalization,  by  providing  thought  leadership  and 
practical innovations to build an inclusive, ethical and sustainable digital society 
and economy; and (c) strategic innovations, by investing consistently into cutting-
edge knowledge as multiplier platforms to trigger systemic changes.  

II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 

12. The country programme was formulated with the contributions of government 
institutions,  civil  society,  academia,  the  private  sector  and  other  bilateral  and 
multilateral  partners.  UNDP  will  leverage  United  Nations  partnerships,  among 
others, to build synergies across programmes and sectors, to harness the expertise 
and knowledge required to advance the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
The UNDP programme follows the mandate of the Strategic Plan, is aligned with 
the Government's action plan 2021-2024 and anchored in the theory of change of 
the UNSDCF.11 

13. UNDP  will  support  integrated  development  solutions  organized  around  three 
outcomes of the UNSDCF 2023-2027: (a) nature, climate and energy; (b) inclusive 
economic  growth;  and  (c)  democratic  governance.  Furthermore,  UNDP  will 
support  the  implementation  of  the  Government’s  commitments  to  international 
cooperation,  expanding  capacities  for  stronger  South-South  and  triangular 
cooperation, in line with the UNSDCF and with a focus on the African continent. 

14. UNDP  will  pursue  its  programmatic  priorities  through  contributing  to  public 
policy development and implementation, formulation and systematization of best 
practices, the strengthening of national capacities, and piloting and implementing 
innovative 
important 
contribution towards the UNSDCF outcomes. Synergies and economies of scale are 
manifested across all outcome areas.  

joint  programming  represents  an 

initiatives.  UNDP 

15. Through  its  programming,  UNDP  will  impact  job  creation  and  income 
generation within a diversified economy; reinforce transparency and accountability 
towards quality public service delivery; and contribute to achievement of national 
and global commitments towards the prevention and mitigation of  the impacts of 
climate change. Work in the area of democratic governance  and rule of law  will 
expand to strengthen the social contract in line with the Algerian Constitution and 
international normative frameworks, ensuring that no one is left behind. 

Outcome 1. Nature, climate and energy 

16.  The UNDP contribution to this outcome is anchored in  the theory of change 
hypothesis that if institutional capacities for the preservation of the environment are 
strengthened, if the implementation of strategies and action plans for sustainable 
management and conservation of natural resources and ecosystems are accelerated, 
if the implementation of energy transition policies is strengthened, if policies and 
strategies for the prevention and management of major risks and the mitigation of 
their financial impact are strengthened, then society and its citizens will be more 
resilient and sufficiently prepared to face vulnerabilities linked to climate change. 

11 See page 23, section 2.2 of UNSDCF 2023-2027. 

4 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

The outcome will contribute to Sustainable Development Goals 5-7, 12-15 and 17, 
utilizing signature solutions 2, 3, 4 and 5.12 

17. Through four outputs, the pillar addresses conservation of natural resources and 
ecosystems and land degradation; climate change; energy transition; and national, 
regional and global commitments. This will be achieved in collaboration with the 
Government, the UNCT and key development partners, as well as measured against 
national  commitments  and  available  Sustainable  Development  Goal  targets  and 
indicators. 

18. The  Algerian  National  Climate  Plan  constitutes  a  mitigation  and  adaptation 
agenda  which  aims  at  realizing  sustained  socioeconomic  growth  and  inclusive 
social  development;  and  promoting  the  integration  of  adaptation  strategies  in 
economic sectors identified as vulnerable to climate change. In partnership with the 
Ministry  of  Environment  and  in  collaboration  with  the  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization  of  the  United  Nations  (FAO)  and  the  Global Environment  Facility 
(GEF),  UNDP  will  support  national  programmes  addressing  climate-change 
vulnerabilities and developing solutions to implement the National Climate Plan. 
UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Environment in the preparation of 
its third national communication, its first biennial update on climate change and the 
elaboration of the national adaptation plan. In collaboration with the secretariat of 
the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification and FAO, UNDP will 
work  to  prevent  land  degradation  and  desertification,  providing  technical  and 
operational support to protect biodiversity. 

19. UNDP will promote strategies, including financing, that incentivize the public 
and private sectors towards innovative investments promoting social and economic 
solutions  that  protect  biodiversity  and  environment.  Support  to  the  national 
adaptation plan is explicitly linked to economic growth and diversification which, 
in return, will benefit from climate financing policy solutions. In this regard, the 
planned  work  with  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and  the  Global  Environment 
Facility on integrated waste management will contribute to the development of a 
circular economy fostering job creation across emerging green value chains.  

20. As the lead agency among resident organizations working on energy transition, 
UNDP will provide technical support to the Government to elaborate a new energy 
model  and  draft  a  new  regulatory  framework  for  energy  transition.  This  will  be 
undertaken in partnership with the International Renewable Energy Agency, among 
other actors. Synergies with an inclusive economic growth model will be sought 
especially on job creation and entrepreneurship development. 

21.  The prevention and mitigation of major natural risks will be another key focus 
for  UNDP.  As  part  of  the  Tripartite  Programme  announced  at  the  Secretary-
General’s Climate Action Summit in September 2019, UNDP will collaborate with 
the  Forest  General  Directorate  of  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture  and  the  insurance 
sector on climate risk financing and inclusive insurance to enhance institutional and 
socioeconomic  resilience  to  climate  risks  and  other  natural  hazards.  The  latter, 
among others, are monitored by the National Delegation for Major Risks, another 
key partner to foster reforms in this area.  

Outcome 2. Inclusive economic growth 

22. The UNDP contribution to this outcome is anchored in the theory of change that 
if national institutions have strengthened capacities to anticipate and respond to the 
labour  market’s  need  for  skills,  if  enterprises  have  strengthened  capacities  to 
develop and integrate sustainable agrifood value chains, and if people benefit from 
support and incentive mechanisms for their inclusion in a green, circular, innovative 
and creative economy, then progress will be made towards a diversified economy 

12 The UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025 cites six signature solutions: 1. Poverty 2. Governance 3. Resilience 4. Environment 5. Energy  
and 6. Gender. 

5 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

producing  decent  and  inclusive  jobs,  while  respecting  the  environment.  The 
outcome will contribute to Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and 
12, leveraging UNDP signature solutions 1, 3, 4 and 5.  

23.  In  line  with  the  Algerian  Economic  Recovery  Plan,13  the  pillar  will  support 
more  resilient,  inclusive  and  solidarity-based  national  economic  development. 
UNDP  will  support  economic  diversification,  the  creation  of  sustainable 
employment and an efficient entrepreneurship ecosystem. To achieve this, UNDP, 
in collaboration with the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Security and 
in synergy with the International Labour Organization (ILO), will consolidate and 
scale up existing work to promote social and solidarity economy, with a focus on 
increasing employment opportunities for the young, women and people living with 
disabilities through social solidarity economic models. 

24.  Seeking synergies at the level of its entire portfolio, UNDP will contribute to 
the  establishment  of  an  inclusive  circular  economy  by  building  on  its  upcoming 
waste  management  project;  and  incentivizing  the  MSME  sector  through  the 
development  of  competencies,  skills  and  capacities  required  for  the  energy 
transition.  In  partnership  with  the  Ministry  of  Start-ups  and  Microenterprises, 
UNDP will support strengthening of institutional capacities to further develop the 
entrepreneurship ecosystem through innovation. Building on the work undertaken 
as part of the COVID-19 response, UNDP will support strengthening of the drug 
testing capacities of the Ministry responsible for pharmaceuticals and industry, a 
prerequisite to expand national pharmaceutical value chains. 

25.  The  elaboration  of  a  government  road  map  for  scaling  up  investment  in  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  is  another  priority  area  that  UNDP  will  lead  in 
partnership  with  United  Nations  agencies.  This  will  allow  the  Government  and 
national institutions to map, optimize and reorient the existent public policies and 
to catalyse strategic investments suitable to the Algerian context. In collaboration 
with the Ministry of Finance and in partnership with the United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), UNDP will support efforts to finance the 
Goals through the implementation of the integrated national financial framework; 
a  solution  to  design,  monitor  and  review  the  Government’s  financial  strategy  to 
achieve sustainable goal-related national priorities. This approach is complemented 
by  a  comprehensive  programme  on  budget  transparency,  which  is  expected  to 
trigger, inter alia, social and gender-responsive budgeting tools. Similarly, through 
the Biodiversity Finance Initiative, UNDP will support the Algerian Government 
to  catalyse  investments  which  are  compatible  with  both  biodiversity  and  nature 
preservation and the imperative of inclusive economic growth. 

26.  To  foster  economic  growth,  government  efforts  are  focused  on  developing 
sustainable and inclusive value chains of  promising sectors by strengthening  the 
capacities of the private sector. Agriculture and fisheries are of critical importance 
considering global food security challenges. UNDP, in collaboration with United 
Nations partners and relevant ministries, will support national efforts to promote 
the  national  strategy  for  MSMEs.  Financial  inclusion  and  increased  access  by 
MSMEs to finance through digital solutions  will also be sought in collaboration 
with the United Nations Capital Development Fund and the International Finance 
Corporation. 

Outcome 3. Democratic governance 

27. The UNDP contribution to this outcome is anchored in the theory of change that 
if the institutional framework for transparency and accountability is strengthened, 
if social cohesion mechanisms and the effective participation of women and youth 
are strengthened, if efficient administration and access to quality public services 
are enhanced, if access to justice is strengthened in accordance with the rule of law, 

13 Plan de Relance Économique (Economic Recovery Plan), Services du Premier Ministre, June 2021. 

6 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

then  Algerian  institutions  will  be  better  equipped  to  provide  quality  services, 
address  inequalities  and  ensure  that  no  one  is  left  behind.  The  outcome  will 
contribute to Sustainable Development Goals 1, 3, 5, 10, 16 and UNDP signature 
solutions 1, 2, 3 and 6. 

28. Through  its  thought  leadership  in  democratic  governance  and  rule  of  law, 
UNDP will support national efforts in the effective application of the Constitution. 
The Constitutional Court and UNDP will jointly  promote the expansion of civic 
space  and  strengthening  citizen  participation  in  legal,  institutional  and  political 
processes. The country office will work with the UNDP Oslo Governance Centre 
and  the  United  Nations  Department  of  Political  and  Peacebuilding  Affairs  to 
improve access to justice by promoting constitutional rights.  

the  enhancement  of 

29. The  fight  against  corruption, 
transparency  and 
accountability  in  the  public  sector  and  the  promotion  of  social  cohesion  are 
priorities aligned with the new Constitution adopted in 2020. This pillar will build 
on lessons  learned  from  the  previous programmatic cycle  and further expand its 
approach  to  include  stronger  engagement  of  civil  society,  along  with  robust 
accountability mechanisms, and promote youth and women’s social, economic and 
political  participation.  UNDP  will  work  with  the  parliament  and  its  members  to 
effectively exercise their legislative, representative and oversight functions while 
also supporting initiatives aiming at increasing women’s political participation.14 
Jointly with United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, UNDP will support the 
State's efforts to finalize and implement a national strategy to promote integrity and 
anti-corruption,  while  also  promoting  sectoral  efforts  to  identify  and  tackle 
corruption risks that undermine the potential of the sector to progress towards the 
Sustainable Development Goals.  

30. With  the  aim  of  leaving  no  one  behind,  UNDP,  jointly  with  the  Ministry  of 
Youth  and  Sports  and  the  United  Nations  Populations  Fund,  will  support 
development and implementation of public policies fostering youth inclusion and 
proactive  participation  across  social,  economic  and  political  spheres.  With  the 
Ministry of Justice, UNDP will deepen its prior work on promoting the rule of law 
through increasing the chances of social reintegration of former detainees in support 
of social cohesion, thereby building trust between the citizens and the State.  

31. In response to national priorities for stronger citizens participation in the social, 
economic and political life of the country, UNDP in partnership with the Ministry 
of Interior, Local Collectivities and Territorial Planning will pursue initiatives to 
strengthen  socioeconomic  participation,  inclusive  local  development  and  the 
transparency and accountability of public institutions that are essential to a peaceful 
and inclusive society. UNDP will build on its prior achievements, which include 
the elaboration of communal development plans, and draw on complementarities 
with  development  partners  to  promote  and  contribute  to  the  attainment  of  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  at  the  local  level.  In  addition,  access  to  social 
services,  particularly  in  health,  will  be  improved  by  strengthening  national 
capacities including through engagement of civil society. 

III.  Programme and risk management 

32. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for 
results  alignment  and  resources  assigned  to  the  programme  at  country  level. 
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarter levels with 
respect to country programmes are prescribed in the organization’s programme and 
operations policies and procedures and internal control framework. 

14 The new electoral law impacted the system of quotas leading to a setback, with just 35 women elected (8.59 per cent of the seats) against 
119 in the former legislature. 

7 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

33.  The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution 
may  be  replaced  by  direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable 
response to force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used 
in a coordinated fashion with other  United Nations agencies to manage financial 
risks.  Cost  definitions  and  classifications  for  programme  and  development 
effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects. 

34. Owing  to  its  middle-income  country  status,  bilateral  and  multilateral  donors 
allocate limited funding to Algeria. UNDP will work with government and other 
partners  to  adapt  to  uncertainties  and  disruptions  related  to  funding.  Innovative 
programming instruments, i.e., the engagement facility, government cost sharing, 
development  advisory  services  and  joint  programming  instruments,  will  be 
envisaged in concertation with the Government. 

35. UNDP  will  work  with  the  Government  through  data  analysis,  midterm 
evaluations and other management and monitoring tools on the principle of shared 
accountability 
to  the  successful 
implementation  of  the  country  programme.  Annual  project  steering  committee 
meetings and when necessary, ad hoc meetings, will ensure that any issues arising 
are addressed in a relevant and timely manner.  

to  anticipate  and  mitigate  risks  related 

36. Quality assurance and social and environmental safeguards will be ensured to 
avoid  negative  social  impacts  and  control  the  environmental  footprint  of  the 
programme. Accordingly, grievance mechanisms will be put in place. UNDP has 
integrated gender equality and women’s empowerment into programming and paid 
particular  attention  to  the  needs  of  youth  and  rural  women  in  localities  lagging 
behind in terms of development to promote inclusive development where no one is 
left behind. 

37.  As  recommended  by  the  evaluation  of  the  previous  programme,  UNDP  will 
strengthen  its  programme  and  operational  capacity  and  that  of  its  partners  to 
effectively  support  implementation  of  the  new  country  programme.  The 
programme’s contingency planning will help UNDP to respond effectively to any 
significant incident, event or situation, e.g., the COVID-19 pandemic, disaster risks, 
etc.  

IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 

38.  The  programme  will  be  aligned  to  the  UNDP  corporate  monitoring  and 
evaluation requirements including United Nations Evaluation Group standards and, 
where relevant, will mobilize dedicated competencies. 

39. As part of the United Nations system, UNDP will contribute to the monitoring 
of  the  country  programme  and  the  UNSDCF  towards  achieving  the  Sustainable 
Development Goals. Based on the evaluation of the previous country programme, 
UNDP will establish a strong results-based management system supported by an 
internal  monitoring  and  evaluation  framework.  Indicators  and  targets  will  be 
optimized and aligned with the specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and time-
bound (“SMART”) standard to measure both impact and progress at outcomes and 
outputs  levels.  Programme  monitoring  will  feed  the  decision-making  process, 
allowing  for  course  corrections  and  inclusion  of  lessons  learned.  Efforts  to 
strengthen national data systems where relevant will be supported and UNDP will 
be responsible to answer any request that strengthen measuring progress against the 
2030 Agenda. 

thematic  evaluations  will 

40. Independent 
inform  programme  design  and 
implementation, identify opportunities for synergies across the country programme 
and promote joint learning and innovation. 

8 

 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

41. Gender  analysis  will  be  conducted  through  a  whole-of-programme  approach, 
including  a  15  per  cent  budget  allocation.  The  gender  marker  will  be  used  to 
monitor targeted and mainstreamed interventions. 

42. A knowledge management plan comprising policy briefs, thematic papers and 
periodic  reports  will  accompany  the  implementation  of  the  programme.  It  will 
promote institutional memory, the culture of sharing and strengthening internal and 
external advocacy and communication. 

9 

 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Annex. Results and resources framework for Algeria (2023-2027) 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDG 5, 6, 7, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 17 

COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: The population  benefits from the implementation of policies adopted by the 
Algerian Government in accordance with the constitutional right to a healthy environment, conform with the energy transition objectives, and in alignment with the multilateral 
environmental treaties relating, among others, to the fight against climate change, the preservation of biological diversity, the management of disaster risks, the fight against 
desertification and land degradation. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 3 (Building Resilience) 

Cooperation Framework outcome 
indicator(s), baselines, target(s) 

Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities 

Area of sustainably managed forest 
ecosystems (management plans, 
operational management plans)  
Baseline: 166,187 ha 
Target: 550,000 ha 

Rate of electricity generation through 
renewable energy 
Baseline: 0.4% (source: IEA) 
Target: 13% 

CO2 emission rate 
Baseline: 151,670 kt of CO2 (2019) 
Target: 4,2% reduction compared to 
2015 (without international support) 
and 13,2% (with international 
support) NDC  

Sustainable development of urban 
environments 
Baseline: Number of strategies 
developed through the UNSCDF ; 
Number of people benefiting from 
capacity-building activities; 

Archives, reports, official documentation of 
the forest administration 

National Energy Balance Sheet 

(https://www.energy.gov.dz/Media/galerie/
bilan_energetique_national_2019_5f7b107
553bcd.pdf)  

National greenhouse gas inventory 

UNSDCF 2023-2027 Implementation 
Reports/Reviews; 
Minutes of the Steering Structure 

Indicative country programme 
outputs (including indicators, 
baselines targets) 

Output 1.1: Institutional capacities 
for the preservation of the 
environment and the fight against 
climate change are strengthened. 

Indicator 1.1.a: Number of 
public and private institutions 
whose capacities were 
strengthened 
Baseline (2023): 2 
Target (2027): At least 35 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
Algeria reports, official 
documentation 

Indicator 1.1.b: Number of 
municipalities with an 
operational climate risk 
management tool 
Baseline (2022): 1 
Target (2027): at least 5 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
Algeria reports, official 
documentation 

Major partners/partnerships 
frameworks 

Estimated cost by 
outcome ($) 

Regular resources:  
$776,000 

Government: The Ministries of Foreign 
Affairs; of the Environment, of Energy; 
of the Interior, including civil 
protection; of Finance; of Agriculture; 
of Industry, of Water Resources; of 
Housing; of Solidarity; of Higher 
Education.  
National Agencies for Climate Change; 
for Dams and Transfers; for the 
Promotion and Rationalization of the 
Use of Energy; for the development of 
investments. 
Renewable Energies Research Centre; 
Electricity and Gas Regulatory 
Commission; Renewable Energies and 
Energy Efficiency Commissariat 
United Nations: FAO, IAEA, 
UNCTAD, United Nations Convention 
to Combat Desertification 
Civil society: Institut National de 
Recherche Forestière, Ecole Nationale 
Supérieure Agronomique d’Alger, 
Institut National de la Vulgarisation 
Agricole, Institut National de la 
Protection des Végétaux, Institut 

10 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Development of sustainable 
agricultural practices 
Baseline: see above baseline 
Target: see above target 

UNSDCF 2023-2027 Implementation 
Reports/Reviews. 
Minutes of the Steering Structure 

DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Other resources: 
$9,050,000 

Technique des Grandes Cultures, Institut 
National de Recherche Agronomique, 
Bureau National d’Etude pour le 
Développement Rural, Association pour 
la promotion des femmes (e.g., 
Association Promotion des Femmes 
Rurales de la Wilaya de Skikda) 
The private sector: National banks, 
international finance institutions, 
assurances 
Donors: GEF, GCF, Governments of 
Denmark; of Germany; of Japan; of the 
Netherlands; of the United States of 
America.  
Others: International Renewable Energy 
Agency, GIZ 

Output 1.2: The implementation of 
strategies and sustainable 
management action plans for the 
conservation of natural resources and 
ecosystems is accelerated 

Indicator 1.2.a: Number of 
national strategies supported for 
their implementation  
Baseline (2022): 2 
Target (2026): At least 3 
Data source, frequency: project 
and government data 

Indicator 1.1.b: A mechanism 
is in place to observe and 
monitor the impact of climate 
change on the coast and the 
marine ecosystem 
Baseline 2022: No 
Target: 2027: Yes 

Output 1.3: The national strategy for 
the energy transition is supported 

Indicator 1.3.a: A set of 
options for a new energy model 
is defined and available for 
decision makers 

Baseline (2022): no 
Target (2027): yes 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
reporting 

Indicator 1.3.b: A draft 
regulatory framework is 
finalized and ready for adoption  
Baseline (2022): No 
Target (2027): Yes 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
reporting, laws 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Output 1.4: Institutional capacities 
to prevent and manage major risks 
and financial mechanisms to mitigate 
their impact are strengthened 

Indicator 1.4.a: Number of 
institutions whose capacities are 
strengthened 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2026): At least 2 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
reporting, official data, National 
Insurance Council 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: SDG 1, 2, 5, 8, 9 and 12 

COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1:  The population including people living in situations of vulnerability, benefits from 
a more resilient and diversified economy thanks to an environment conducive to investment and the development of sustainable businesses that generate decent jobs. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1 (Structural Transformation) 

National Office of Statistics (ONS) 

National Employment Agency (ANEM) 

ONS 

ANEM 

Proportion of youth (aged 15-24) not 
in school and not in employment or 
training by gender (National SDG 
indicator 8.6.1) 
Baseline: Overall: 26.2% (2019); 
Women: 32.1% (2019)  
Men: 20.4% (2019) 
Target: Overall: 22%;  Women:27%; 
Men:17% 

Unemployment Rate 
Baseline: Overall: 9.1% (2019) 
Women: 20.4% (2019) 
Men: 11.4% (2019) 
Overall Youth (16 - 24 years): 23.6% 
(2019) 
Female Youth (16-24): 45.1% (2019) 
Male Youth (16-24): 26.9% (2019) 

Output 2.1: National institutions 
have strengthened capacities to 
anticipate and respond to the skills 
needs of the labour market and 
support the transition to decent work, 
especially for women and youth 

Indicator 2.1.a: Number of 
national institutions whose 
capacities are strengthened to 
promote inclusive and 
sustainable employment 
Baseline (2022): 5 
Target (2027): at least 9 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
Reporting 

Output 2.2: Institutions and 
enterprises (micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises) have 
strengthened capacities to develop 

Government: The Ministries of Labour; 
of Vocational Training; of Trade; of the 
Interior; of Foreign Affairs; of Finance; 
of Agriculture; of Fisheries; of Industry; 
of the Environment; of Energy 
Transition; of Higher Education; of 
Start-ups; of Post and 
telecommunications; of Tourism; of 
Youth. 
Central Bank; National Waste Agency; 
National Agency for Entrepreneurship 
Support and Development; National 
Conservatory of Environmental 
Training; The Regulatory Authority of 
Post and Electronic Communications; 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry. 
FAO, ILO, International Trade Centre, 
WIPO 

Regular resources:  
$700,000 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Target: Women: 17%; Overall Youth 
20%; Female Youth: 38%; Male 
Youth 22% 

ONS 

Directorate General for the Customs 

Bank of Algeria 

ONS 

Centre National du Registre du Commerce 

DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Civil society: Houari Boumediene 
University of Science and Technology 
Houari Boumediene, Mouloud-
Mammeri University of Tizi Ouzou, 
Associations of CapDel, Sidra 
(Association for youth development), 
CirculeR, cooperatives, professional 
organizations, Torba (collective for 
agroecology) 
The private sector: Mobile operators, 
banks, producer organizations, 
incubators, BBC Media Action 
IFIs: African Development Bank, 
International Finance Corporation, 
World Bank 
Donors: Governments of Germany; of 
Belgium; of France; of Italy; of Japan; 
of the Netherlands; of the United 
Kingdom. European Union, GEF 
Others: Spanish Agency for 
International Development Cooperation, 
French Development Agency 

Other resources: 
$7,370,000 

promising sectors in a sustainable 
manner 

Indicator 2.2.a: Number of 
MSMEs that have benefited 
from capacity- building 
programmes 
Baseline (2022): 32 
Target (2027): 382 
Data source, frequency: 
Sectoral data, UNDP reporting  

Indicator 2.2.b: Number of 
local institutional structures 
supported in the field of Social 
and Solidarity Economy and 
support to job creation: 
Baseline (2022): 16 
Target (2027): 371 

Output 2.3: Young women and men 
entrepreneurs benefit from 
sustainable economic inclusion 
through the promotion of social 
solidarity economy 

Indicator 2.2.b: Number of 
people disaggregated by age 
and gender who have benefited 
from financial inclusion 
solutions 
Baseline (2022): 3040 (1,535 
women/1,505 men) 
Target (2027): 4,640 
Data source, frequency: UNDP 
reporting  

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL:  SDG  1, 3, 5, 10, 16 

COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: The population benefits from transparent, accountable and effective institutions 
that guarantee their effective participation and representation, the rule of law, as well as the promotion of inclusiveness and non-discrimination values, including people living in 
situations of vulnerability. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2 (Leaving no one behind) 

Corruption Perception Index Score 
Baseline: 36/100 (2020) 
Target: TBD 

Primary public expenditure as a 
proportion of initial approved budget, 
by sector (or budget code or other 
similar criteria) - Indicator SDG 
16.6.1 
Baseline: 99.7983 (2019) 
Target: TBD 

Participation and representation at all 
levels of decision-making (SDG 
indicator 16.7.1); 
Women's representation in 
parliament/government 
Baseline: Women in national 
parliament: National parliament 
8.11% (2021) 
Target: TBD 

Youth’s capacities for political 
participation  
Baseline: Youth (< 40 yrs) in 
national parliament: 33.41% (2021) 
Target: TBD 

Proportion of population whose last 
experience with public services was 
satisfactory - Indicator SDG 16.6.2 
Baseline: NA 
Target: TBD 

14 

Transparency International Classification 

Output 3.1: The institutional 
framework for transparency and 
accountability, and its application are 
strengthened in line with the SDGs 

Government: The Ministries of the 
Interior; of Relations with parliament; of 
Finance; of Justice; of Health; of 
Labour; of Training; of Solidarity. 

Regular resources: 
$1,000,000  

SDG Global Database  

SDG Global Database 

Ministry of Youth and Sports; of the 
Interior 

Ministry of the Interior 
Ministry of Digitization and Statistics 

Indicator 3.1.a: Number of 
regulatory texts on transparency 
and the fight against corruption 
elaborated 
Baseline (2022): None 
Target (2026): At least 2 
Data source, frequency: Official 
publications, UNDP reporting 

Indicator 3.1.b: Number of 
supported institutions  
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2026): At least 4 
Data source, frequency: 
Memorandums of 
Understanding, project 
documents, UNDP reporting 

Indicator 3.1.c: A government 
road map for development 
financing is developed 
Baseline (2021): No 
Target (2026): Yes 
Data source, frequency: Official 
publications, Project 
Documents, UNDP Reporting 

Ministry of Finance 

Output 3.2: Sectoral strategies that 
promote the effective participation of 
women and youth and integrate 

Central Bank; National People's 
Assembly and Council of the Nation; 
Court of Auditors; Inspectorate General 
of Finance; National Prevention and 
Anti-Corruption Body; National 
Economic, Social and Environmental 
Council; Mediator of the Republic. 

United Nations: UNCTAD, UNICEF, 
UN-Women, WFP 

Civil society: National integrity 
network, investigative journalism, 
specialized research laboratories 

IFIs: World Bank, Islamic Development 
Bank 
Donors: Governments of the Republic of 
Korea, of Switzerland of the United 
Kingdom, of the United States. 
European Union; Peacebuilding Fund.  
Others: Berghof Foundation, Folke 
Bernadotte Academy, Collaborative 
Learning Projects Inter-Parliamentary 
Union, Global Organization of 
Parliamentarians Against Corruption, 
UNDP Oslo Governance Centre; UNDP 
Crisis Bureau 

Other resources:  
$8,350,000 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of Digitization and Statistics 

social cohesion mechanisms into 
public life are supported 

DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Indicator 3.2.a: Number of 
sectoral strategies supported 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): At least 2 
Data source, frequency: official 
documentation, UNDP 
reporting 

Output 3.3: Local development and 
governance are strengthened through 
improved access to services and 
inclusive economic diversification 

Indicator 3.3.a: Number of 
supported communes 
Baseline (2022): 7  
Target (2027): 20  
Data source, frequency: official 
documents, UNDP reporting  

Indicator 3.3.b: Number of 
health facilities that have had 
their capacity strengthened  
Baseline (2022): 50 
Target (2027): at least 70 Data 
source, frequency: UNDP 
programmatic data, Ministry of 
Health, Population and Hospital 
Reform, Ministry of 
Pharmaceutical Industry   

Output 3.4: Access to justice in 
accordance with the rule of law is 
strengthened 

Indicator 3.4.a: Number of 
communication activities on the 
Constitutional Court for the 
benefit of the population 
Baseline (2021): 3 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/DZA/4 

Total 

16 

Target (2027): 4  
Source: Official documentation 
(data from the Constitutional 
Court), UNDP reporting  

Indicator 3.4.b: Per cent of 
inmates disaggregated by sex 
with a standardized 
reintegration plan containing a 
release plan 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 40% male & 
40% female 
Data source, frequency:  
Official documentation, UNDP 
Reporting 

Output 3.5: The effectiveness of 
parliamentary functions is 
strengthened in accordance with the 
rule of law 

Indicator 3.5.a: Per cent of 
seats in national parliament who 
were trained by UNDP 
Baseline (2022): 0% 
Target (2027): At least 20% 
Source: Official documentation 
(data from the parliament), 
UNDP reporting  

Regular resources:  
$2,476,000 
Other resources: 
$24,770,000 
Total:  
$27,246,000 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
