Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the Cooperation Framework 
1.  Guinea-Bissau is rich in natural habitat, resources, and the ethnic and religious composition 
of its social fabric, laying a solid foundation for transformation. Youth (15-35 years old) make 
up  50  per  cent  of  the  population,  representing  an  opportunity  for  social  and  economic 
development, as young women and men can  contribute as agents of change, political actors, 
innovators,  entrepreneurs,  and  peacebuilders.  Wide  gender  inequalities,  including  access  to 
land, credit and other resources – and the digital gender divide – persist, depriving women of 
rights  and  opportunities.  Vulnerable  employment  is  76  per  cent  of  total  employment  and 
84 per cent  of  female  employment  (2020).1  Poverty  is  persistently  high,  with  an  estimated 
70 per cent of the population (50 per cent women) living below the poverty line, and a Human 
Development Index ranking of 175 out of 189 countries.2 Two of every three citizens suffer 
from multidimensional poverty.  
2. Despite its diverse marine and terrestrial  ecosystems, Guinea-Bissau has yet  to  realize its 
potential  as  a  small  island  developing  State.  The  United  Nations  common  country  analysis 
indicated that the terrestrial and marine natural resources accessible to the local population have 
been  affected  by  climate  pressure  and  weak  governance.  Political  instability,  institutional 
weakness,  and  corruption  hamper  the  fight  against  transnational  organized  crime.  Legal 
framework gaps and regional dynamics deepen these trends.3 Economic growth has potential, 
yet lacks diversification and suffers from informality. Despite renewable energy resources, only 
29 per cent of the population have access to electricity and 1 per cent to clean cooking fuels.4 
3. According to the Global Health Security Index, the country has the second most fragile health 
system in the world, and one of the highest infection rates of HIV/AIDS – particularly among 
women  –  malaria,  and  tuberculosis  in  the  Economic  Community  of  West  African  States 
(ECOWAS)  region.  The  spread  of  COVID-19  has  exacerbated  structural  weaknesses  and 
vulnerabilities. The restrictive measures that coincided with the peak cashew harvest in 2020 
and disruptions  in global supply chains  pushed  thousands of people  – particularly women – 
further into poverty.5  
4. The National Strategy for Development, Employment, and Industrial Promotion, 2020-2024 
(Hora Tchiga), takes advantage of the opportunities presented by COVID-19-related recovery 
to  push  for  sustainable  and  inclusive  development.  The  National  Development  Plan,  2020-
2023,    enumerates  six  strategic  priority  areas:  (a)  consolidate  democracy,  rule  of  law  and 
reform/modernization  of  public  institutions;  (b)  promote  economic  reform,  growth  and 
employment; (c) develop productive economic sectors and infrastructure; (d) enhance human 
capital  and  improvement  of  living  conditions;  (e)  revitalize  foreign  policy,  promotion  of 
regional  integration,  and  valorization  of  the  diaspora;  and  (f)  preserve  biodiversity,  combat 
climate change, and enhance natural capital.  
5. The  Cooperation  Framework,  2022-2026,  identifies  three  outcomes  to  help  achieve  the 
national  strategy,  namely,  (a)  improved  democratic  governance,  peace,  and  rule  of  law; 
(b) structural economic transformation driven by enhanced productive capacity, value addition, 
blue  economy  and  inclusive  green  growth,  capitalizing  on  small  island  developing  State 
characteristics; and (c) increased and equitable access to and use of quality social services. 
 
1 UNDP Guinea-Bissau gender analysis, 2021 
2 Human Development Report, 2020  
3 The Fund for Peace. 2021. “Fragile States Index 2021 – annual report.” https://fragilestatesindex.org/2021/05/20/fragile-states-index-2021-
annual-report; and “Common country analysis – Guinea-Bissau”, United Nations, 2020 
4 Ibid. 
5 “Building Back Better Starts Now: COVID-19 Socioeconomic Impact analysis”, United Nations 2020, and “Building Back Better for SMEs in 
Guinea-Bissau” UNDP 2021.  Declines in income and temporary or permanent loss of employment were reported for 72 per cent of households 
(higher in female-headed households). 
2/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
6. The  UNDP  programme  is  well  positioned  to  support  and  contribute  to  the  Cooperation 
Framework through a package of strategic upstream and downstream interventions, in line with 
the recommendations of the independent evaluation of the current country programme, focused 
on (a) sustaining peace and social cohesion through democratic, inclusive governance and rule 
of  law;  (b)  leveraging  small  island  developing  State  characteristics  for  inclusive  green/blue 
growth, while tackling climate change and conserving biodiversity; and (c) strengthening health 
and social protection systems while improving access to quality services. To that end, UNDP, 
leveraging  the  six  signature  solutions  of  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan,  2022-2025,  its  renewed 
strategic  offer  in  Africa,  the  Samoa  Pathway,  and  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable 
Development, will (a) promote a coherent development offer that adheres to the principles of 
leaving  no  one  behind,  gender  equality,  equity,  justice,  accountability,  and  transparency, 
anchored 
to  citizen’s  needs,  social  cohesion,  and  environmental 
sustainability;  (b)  build  linkages  between  interrelated  development  issues;  (c)  utilize  its 
comparative  advantage  in  applying  integrated  inter-agency  cross-sectoral  development 
approaches;  (d)  leverage  its  global  innovation  work,  including  tracking  and  combating 
multidimensional  poverty;  (e)  devise  innovative  ways  of  problem-solving  in  the  context  of 
#NextGenUNDP;  (f)  embrace  innovations  that  tackle  developmental  and  programme 
implementation  challenges;  and  (g)  invest  in  digital  transformation  and  partner  network 
creation,  while  building  on  and  upgrading  local  knowledge.  UNDP  will  adopt  a  portfolio 
systems approach to planning and implementation,  data collection, evidence, and knowledge 
generation.  This  will  position  UNDP  as  a  knowledge  broker,  thought  leader  and  innovator, 
using and strengthening its convening capacities and partnership-building role in the  United 
Nations country team and beyond.  
in  responsiveness 
7. UNDP  is  a  trusted  government  partner  with  comparative  advantages  that  complement 
United Nations development efforts. It has a strong value proposition in governance and the 
rule of law, promoting inclusive governance, sustaining peace, establishing meaningful political 
dialogue, empowering and engaging agents of change networks, and supporting political system 
reforms to create an environment conducive to long-term stability and sustainable development. 
This will continue to be the cornerstone of Cooperation Framework efforts. As evidenced by 
the  country  programme  evaluation,  UNDP  supported  the  Government  in  holding  fair  and 
transparent elections, strengthening oversight  mechanisms, and improving delivery of justice 
services.  Its  comparative  advantage  builds  on  experience  and  development  results  in 
collaboration  with  the  Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF)  to  enhance  environmental  and 
natural resources management – including biodiversity conservation – and resilience to climate 
change risks.  
8. Within the broader United Nations response to COVID-19, UNDP has supported Guinea-
Bissau in preparing, responding and recovering since the early stages of the pandemic. Based 
on the successful Global Fund partnership, UNDP will draw on its technical experience and 
capacities with other epidemiological risks to support the World Health Organization (WHO)-
led  health  response,  including  procurement  of  essential  health  products,  strengthening  crisis 
management  and  response,  response  digitization,  and  addressing  socioeconomic  impacts. 
Under UNDP leadership, the country team conducted a socio-economic impact assessment that 
identified  the  multidimensional  effects  of  the  pandemic.  UNDP  is  poised  to  support  the 
Government in its tailored response to COVID-19, reducing its negative effects by restoring 
livelihoods of the newly poor.  
9. UNDP is implementing its resource mobilization and partnership strategy for implementing 
the  peacebuilding  priorities  as  part  of  the  transition,  with  improved  communication  and 
knowledge dissemination at its centre. UNDP is reinforcing existing partnerships and building 
new ones, including through South-South cooperation, to enhance the scope and resilience of 
its programme portfolio and knowledge transfer. New partnerships are geared towards bringing 
in regional and global experiences, expertise, and innovations, while integrating partners at all 
21-17638 
 
3/15 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
levels into networks for development. UNDP is set to provide new development platforms to 
attract  a  range  of  partners  across  sectors  and  deliver  on  the  NextGen  promise,  as  the  main 
partner of choice for a COVID-19 green response and recovery and Cooperation Framework 
implementation. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
10. The theory of change is built on the conviction that growth is a transformational process 
and that UNDP can contribute to socioeconomic development by connecting and strengthening 
networks of change agents. Recent assessments show that the developmental challenges facing 
Guinea-Bissau are due primarily to structural weaknesses across the factors that determine the 
path  and  the  outcome  of  transformation  (human  capital,  governance,  public  policies,  social 
norms, and business environment).6 Those weaknesses will be addressed through cross-sectoral 
interventions and innovative solutions.  
11. The  theory  hypothesizes  that  the  country  programme,  developed  in  consultation  with 
government  counterparts,  civil  society  organizations,  the  private  sector  and  development 
partners, in alignment with the UNDP Strategic Plan and the Africa Promise, will contribute to 
Cooperation Framework outcomes by (a) seeking and empowering agents of change networks, 
particularly for youth and women; (b) strengthening the capacities of institutions and shaping 
the  social,  political  and  economic  spheres;  (c)  promoting  a  paradigm  shift  in  development 
planning and expanding state capacities to devise evidence-based development policies geared 
towards  inclusive  green  growth  that  integrate  risk  management,  resilience-building  and 
sustainable utilization of natural resources and renewable energy; (d) supporting and creating 
an  enabling  environment  for  private  sector  growth  and  integrating  risk  management  and 
sustainability  into  business  culture;  (e)  enhancing  state  capacities  to  deliver  social  services, 
particularly  health,  and  social  protection,  targeting  women,  youth  and  the  most  vulnerable; 
(f) creating an enabling environment for political dialogue, leadership development and citizen 
engagement; and (g) promoting increased state responsiveness to citizens’ needs. To these ends, 
UNDP will work on three interconnected nodes: 
Node 1. Sustaining peace and social cohesion through transformational, democratic, and 
inclusive governance and rule of law 
12. Following  a  portfolio  systems  approach  and  aligned  with  Cooperation  Framework 
outcome 1 and National Development Plan objective 1, UNDP will engage with a broad range 
of  national  and  international  partners,  including  sectoral  ministries,  the  National  People’s 
Assembly, electoral management bodies, the Media Consortium for Social Communication, the 
CSOs Consultation Space, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Accountability Lab, the Impact 
Hub,  the  Instituto  Pedro  Pires,  and  the  University  of  Cambridge,  to  support  a  continuous 
national  and inter-party dialogue  on political reforms, including revision of the Constitution 
and promoting inclusive, fair and transparent political processes.  
13. UNDP  will  use  its  multidimensional  development  approach  to  enhance  democratic 
governance  and  sustain  peace  by  seeking,  empowering,  and  interconnecting  change  agents 
through its flagship initiative, the Leadership Academy, within institutions and society at large, 
particularly women, youth, and individuals at risk of being marginalized, such as people with 
disabilities  and  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  transgender  and  queer  people,  who  can  transform 
decision-making processes through political and social organization and informed participation. 
Special  attention  will  be  paid  to  enhancing  women’s  participation  in  public  affairs  while 
addressing  root  causes  of  gender-based  exclusion,  marginalization,  and  violence.  Enhanced 
accountability,  effectiveness,  and  responsiveness  of  public  institutions,  including  through 
 
6 Guinea-Bissau common country analysis, UNDP 2021, and “Guinea-Bissau – Country Economic Memorandum: Escaping the Low-Growth 
Trap”, World Bank 2020 
4/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
digitization,  will  promote  a  sense  of  citizenship  and  increase  people’s  trust  in  the  State. 
Decentralization  and  local  governance  will  bring  the  State  closer  to  its  citizens  and  enable 
consensus-building and civic engagement, especially of youth and women.  
14.  Recognizing  that  development,  peace,  security,  and  human  rights  are  interlinked  and 
mutually  reinforcing,  UNDP,  working  with  the  newly  created  National  People’s  Assembly 
Good Offices group and other mediators’ networks, will support peacebuilding priorities and 
inclusive political processes. UNDP will promote dynamic participation of the entire society in 
its governance, ensuring that collaborative solutions are developed and peacebuilding dividends 
benefit all. UNDP will support a strong, independent ‘mediascape’ to bring public concerns and 
voices into the open, encouraging ongoing citizens’ checks and assessments of public policies, 
promoting media independence, fighting ‘information pollution’, and reducing hate speech. 
15. Strengthening  the  rule  of  law  by  supporting  participative  judicial  and  security  sector 
reforms,  facilitating  community  members’  engagement,  capacity-building,  digitization,  and 
transfer of technology and technical expertise to judicial, security and police services, UNDP 
will contribute to improving safety and stability, enhancing people’s trust in public institutions, 
and creating an enabling environment for national and foreign investments. Resulting dividends 
for the population will strengthen the social fabric, improving access to justice, socioeconomic 
opportunities and human rights, and preventing violent extremism. UNDP will work to bridge 
the intersection between traditional and formal institutions to drive trust in both communities 
and public services, encompassing access to justice and service provision. 
16. Building on its success in the realm of governance and the rule of law, and its established 
partnership  with  government  counterparts,  UNDP,  together  with  international  organizations 
such as the Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime  and  the United Nations 
Office  on  Drugs  and  Crime  (UNODC),  will  seek  to  create  enclaves  of  accountability  and 
transparency to support an enabling institutional framework, leading a transformational change 
in favour of the fight against impunity, corruption, and transnational organized crime. This will 
contribute to more robust and well-informed economic governance, judicial reform and human 
rights protection systems, through civil society engagement and the strengthening of national 
human rights institutions in line with the Paris Principles. Particular attention will be paid to 
combating  gender-based  violence, 
including  sexual  violence,  harmful  practices  and 
discrimination, by ensuring access to justice for women and girls, youth, and vulnerable groups; 
and providing landowners with justice on land reform.  
Node 2. Leveraging small island developing State characteristics for inclusive green/blue 
growth and sustainable development 
17. Aligned with Cooperation Framework outcome 2 and objectives 2, 3, 4 and 6 of the National 
Development Plan, UNDP will build an ecosystem of development partners,  United Nations 
organizations, regional institutions, and key stakeholders to capitalize on the country’s small 
island developing State characteristics, turning sources of vulnerability into opportunities and 
building  resilience.  Based on  the  “Rising  up  for  SIDS”  approach,  UNDP  will  enhance  state 
capacity  to  devise  evidence-based  national  development  policies  geared  towards  fostering 
inclusive and diversified green growth, sustainable human development, and better targeting of 
vulnerable and marginalized groups. Greener growth, fuelled by clean renewable energy, will 
contribute  to  environmental  sustainability  and  enhance  resilience  to  the  effects  of  climate 
change.  UNDP  will  partner  with  and  expand  on  work  of  United  Nations  partners  and 
international  financial  institutions  (such  as  surveys  and  analyses  conducted  by  the  United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the World Bank) to combine their technical capacities 
with  UNDP  operational  and  policy  advisory  capacities  and  global  expertise  in  addressing 
multidimensional  poverty  to  enhance  statistical  capacity,  access  to  quality  data,  and  policy-
oriented  research.  Strengthened  planning  capacities  of  government  counterparts,  leading  to 
more coherent plans and robust expenditure frameworks, will contribute to fighting corruption. 
21-17638 
 
5/15 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
18. UNDP  will  enhance  the  contributions  of  the  formal  and  informal  private  sector  to 
productivity,  added  value  and livelihoods  by amplifying  their capacity, creating an enabling 
environment, addressing bottlenecks and challenges that inhibit growth, through innovations in 
product and cluster development, microfinance and financial inclusion, and by expanding the 
capacity  of  vulnerable  groups  to  participate  in  economic  life,  while  capitalizing  on  UNDP 
presence, 
implementation  capacities,  and  established  relationships  with  government 
counterparts  and  stakeholders,  harnessing  the  expertise  of  partners  such  as  UNCDF,  the 
International  Labour  Organization  (ILO),  the  World  Bank,  the  African  Development  Bank 
(AfDB) and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). UNDP will 
leverage  youth  and  economically  active  women  through  capacity-building,  enhancing 
participation in decision-making processes while addressing underlying causes of the gender 
digital  divide,  gaps  in  economic  participation  and  other  discriminatory  social  norms  and 
practices, South-South cooperation, incubation, enhancing the innovation and entrepreneurship 
ecosystem, and supporting the creation of economic opportunities to promote a more productive 
and innovative private sector, which provides over 90 per cent of female employment. This will 
reduce vulnerable employment among women. 
19. While there is a need to move up the value chain and increase domestic added value, the 
inherent  characteristics  of  Guinea  Bissau  –  in  common  with  those  of  most  small  island 
developing States – increase the cost of doing business and inhibit economies of scale. A more 
viable model is to focus on high added-value niche products and services, leveraging cultural 
and natural diversity, developing sustainable economic ecosystems, boosting quality, and using 
marketing and branding to target higher-end markets. This model, better suited to preserving 
ecosystems  and  natural  resources,  will  be  achieved  by  creating  an  enabling  environment 
upstream,  and  private  sector support,  capacity-building,  knowledge  and  technology  transfer, 
and digitization downstream.  
20. UNDP  will:  (a)  enhance  stakeholders’  capacities  to  integrate  disaster  and  climate  risk 
management  into national  development  policies,  plans,  and  business  models.  This  approach 
will  involve  informed  cross-cutting  national  development  planning  focused  on  national 
priorities  such  as  climate  change,  energy,  water,  health,  and  food  security;  (b) support  the 
country in raising its ambitions for its nationally determined contribution to achieve the Paris 
agreement  goals;  (c)  support  cities/communities  in  better  valuing  natural  capital,  including 
biodiversity, and improving environmental governance and resilience to climate and disaster 
risks. This will be achieved through integrated local development that includes spatial planning 
tools, early warning systems, information systems, participation  mechanisms and behavioral 
change; (d) support stakeholders in accelerating sustainable energy access through renewable 
energy investments for vulnerable communities, and policy, institutional and legal frameworks; 
and  (e)  build  on  lessons  learned  from  the  GEF  portfolio  and  support  national  partners  in 
mobilizing  more  climate  finance.  Those  interventions  form  part  of  a  package  to  accelerate 
implementation  of  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development,  the  Paris  Agreement  on 
Climate Change and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.  
Node  3.  Strengthening  health  and  social  protection  systems  and  improving  access  to 
quality services 
21. Aligned  with  Cooperation  Framework  outcome  3  and  objective  4  of  the  National 
Development Plan, this node builds on long experience in devising social policies and social 
protection schemes and implementing critical health programming. Using Global Fund grants 
combined with the technical expertise of UNFPA, UNICEF and WHO, and financial resources 
from AfDB, the European Union, the Islamic Development Bank and the World Bank, UNDP 
will  seek  to  attain  several  goals:  (a)  improving  preventive,  diagnostic,  and  curative  health 
services for  people; (b) encouraging health behaviours and institutional incentives to reduce 
harmful health practices in both communities and the formal health sector; (c) strengthened and 
expanded coverage of social protection systems through innovative solutions; (d) a coherent 
6/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
national  social  protection  policy  with  a  non-contributory  social  safety  net  as  a  core  pillar; 
(e) improved  targeting  of  the  most  vulnerable;  and  (f)  strengthened  institutional  capacity, 
including a directorate and a multisectoral steering committee for social protection. These are 
essential  steps  towards  providing  greater  access  to  affordable  and  quality  services  for  all, 
improving identification and targeting of pregnant women, children under 5 years old and other 
vulnerable groups, and reducing vulnerability to health and social risks. 
22. UNDP will: (a) support the provision of preventive, diagnostic and therapeutic health and 
social services by expanding previous Global Fund-supported activities to reinforce the health 
system, exploring innovative South-South cooperation schemes for managing and delivering 
health  and  social  services,  strengthening  early  warning  systems  through  better  disease 
surveillance, coordination, digitization and innovation – such as setting up the first drone centre 
for a wide range of uses – and reinforcing health infrastructures throughout the country using 
the  UNDP  ‘smart  facility’  approach;  (b)  advocate  and  foster  health-seeking  behaviours  and 
practices  by  supporting  engagement  of  the  Ministry  of  Health  and  the  COVID-19  High 
Commission with traditional health providers, regarded by the population as the first line for 
health services; and (c) invest in activities for the eradication of gender-biases and promotion 
of systemic behavioral change. 
III.  Programme and risk management  
23. This  country  programme  document  outlines  UNDP  contributions  to  national  results  and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country,  regional  and  headquarters  levels  are  prescribed  in  the  Programme  and  Operations 
Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework. 
24.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all the programme to enable response to force majeure. 
The  Harmonized  Approach  to  Cash  Transfer  will  be  used  in  a  coordinated  fashion  with 
United Nation  partners  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and  classifications  for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.  
25.  Four major areas of risk have been identified: (a) political instability leading to frequent 
changes in government, increased impunity, and human rights violations; (b) the implications 
of  continuing  low  capacity  of  local  partners,  including  government  agencies;  (c)  UNDP 
assuming extended responsibilities  in  the transition to pursue the peacebuilding agenda; and 
(d) the persistence of COVID-19 and other regional epidemics.  
26.  UNDP will mitigate those risks by: (a) ensuring balance between upstream and downstream 
interventions  and  between  short-term  responsiveness  to  government  requests  and  long-term 
development  objectives;  (b)  diversifying  partnerships  to  include,  locally,  the  private  sector, 
non-governmental  organizations,  civil  society  and  community-based  organizations,  and, 
internationally, regional and international organizations, integrating capacity development in 
all engagements with local partners; (c) enhancing foresight capacity and thought-leadership to 
mitigate  political  and  programme  risks;  (d)  supporting  inter-  and  intra-party  dialogue,  and 
advancing  government  reform  agendas  for  political  stabilization  and  peace  consolidation; 
(e) continuing  to  expand  the  capacities  of  state  and  non-state  actors  to  play  a  larger  role  in 
programme  implementation;  (f)  diversifying  the  programme  resource  base  through  new 
networks  of  partners  and  regularly  updating  its  partnership,  resource  mobilization  and 
communication strategies and related action plan, as recommended by the country programme 
evaluation,  and  adopting  an  integrated  approach  with  United  Nations  and  regional 
organizations;  and  (g)  closely  monitoring  the  COVID-19  situation,  updating  its  business 
continuity plan and reinforcing the capacities of concerned partners. 
21-17638 
 
7/15 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
27. Through the application of UNDP Social and Environmental Standards, UNDP will ensure 
management and mitigation of these risks. With the support of evidence labs and the human-
centred  design  mainstreamed  by  the  local  AccLab,  UNDP  will  pilot  localized  innovative 
solutions prior to scaling up.  Emphasis  will be  placed on contributing to mainstreaming the 
Sustainable Development Goals, data collection and evidence-based policy decision-making. 
UNDP  will  anchor  some  of  its  interventions  in  regional  and  subregional  platforms  and 
processes, and will strengthen vertical and horizontal coordination between national authorities 
to support stability and long-term vision across interventions.  
28. UNDP  will explore  various execution  modalities  and  ensure adequate  human capacities, 
structures,  management,  and  oversight  systems  to  implement  its  programme  successfully  in 
partnership with regional, subregional and international organization. It will emphasize South-
South and triangular cooperation. UNDP has launched a restructuring and capacity assessment 
to ensure fit-for-purpose capacity and a well-prepared organizational structure, considering the 
programmatic expansion  anticipated for the United Nations transition. Staff capacity will be 
developed through continuing learning and career development in accordance with the localized 
‘People for 2030’ strategy. Wherever appropriate, the country office will use existing UNDP 
business centre services to address pertinent needs.  
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
29. The country programme  indicators are aligned with the  Cooperation Framework and the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals  to  which  programme  interventions  are  aligned.  Limited 
statistical  capacity  and  data  scarcity  in  Guinea-Bissau  necessitate  a  mix  of  traditional  and 
innovative  monitoring  and  evaluation  methods.  The  plan  tracks  a  range  of  quantitative  and 
qualitative  ‘SMART’ indicators, disaggregated  by relevant criteria (such as  gender and age) 
and reports on relevant outcomes in the Cooperation Framework. International sources will be 
used to complement national ones, and where data  to build direct indicators are  unavailable 
indirect indicators will be used to gauge impact. UNDP will invest in (a) a strong monitoring 
and  evaluation  system,  including  a  revamped  programme  management  support  unit; 
(b) strengthening  statistical  capacity  in  Guinea-Bissau,  in  collaboration  with  United  Nations 
entities,  the  World  Bank  and  development  partners;  and  (c)  incorporating  participatory 
statistics,  visual  data  representation  such  as  maps  and  interactive  sites,  and  social  and 
environmental  screening  procedures.  The  monitoring  and  evaluation  plan  includes  lessons 
learned from project implementation. It emphasizes the tracking, assessment and interpretation 
of  results  and  changes,  including  in  government  policies  and  plans,  and  links  them  to 
interventions. The plan will assess the role played by UNDP and by others, and will assess the 
gaps to guide follow-up, scaling up, and adaptive programming.  
30. UNDP will: (a) conduct its own surveys, when possible, and use field visits, semi-structured 
interviews  and  focus  groups  to  collect  baselines  and  targets,  and  independent  evaluations; 
(b) leverage  evidence  labs  to  improve  data  collection  and  results-based  monitoring  and 
evaluation on the ground; (c) use design thinking to prototype development interventions before 
scaling  them  up;  (d)  undertake  periodic  evaluations,  in  collaboration  with  national  and 
international  partners,  to  identify  best  practices,  capture  lessons  learned,  and  generate 
knowledge;  (e)  use  community-based  monitoring,  partnering  with  grass-roots  civil  society 
organizations,  to  gather  data  on  the  ground  in  support  of  results-based  monitoring  and 
evaluation, emphasizing the emergence of patterns of desired transformative change; (f) utilize 
randomized or selected control groups to periodically assess the contributions of community-
based  targeted  interventions;  and  (g)  explore  partnership  with  academic  institutions  to 
administer innovative techniques of monitoring and evaluation. 
8/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Guinea-Bissau (2022-2026) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Development Plan (NDP), 2020-2023, objective 1. Consolidate the democratic rule of law, reform and modernize public institutions 
Africa Union Agenda 2063: Aspirations 3, 4; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 5, 16 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1. By 2026, people in Guinea-Bissau enjoy improved democratic governance, peace, and rule of law, and 
their needs are met. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1:  Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions  
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s) 
Data source and frequency 
of data collection, and 
responsibilities 
Major 
partners/partnerships/ 
frameworks 
Estimated cost 
by outcome 
(in $ thousands) 
Indicative country programme outputs (including indicators, 
baselines, targets) 
Data source: Activity report 
(Civil society organizations 
– CSO – alliance to monitor 
reforms) 
Frequency: annual 
Indicator 1.1. % of population 
who believe decision-making 
is inclusive and responsive, 
by sex, age, disability, and 
population group 
Baseline: absent 
Target: 40% women, 
60% men, 5% people with 
disabilities 
Output 1.1 Improved national capacities to ensure democratic 
governance and respond to all citizens’ needs 
Regular: 5,880 
UNFPA 
UNICEF 
UNODC 
United Nations Office for 
West Africa and the Sahel 
Peacebuilding Support 
Office  
Department of Political 
and Peacebuilding Affairs 
International Organization 
for Migration 
Accountability Lab 
Impact Hub 
University of Cambridge 
West African Network for 
Peacebuilding 
Peacebuilding Fund 
Institute Pedro Pires  
Inter-Parliamentary Union 
 
Other: 33,760 
 
Indicator 1.1.1. Number of measures to strengthen accountability 
(including social accountability), prevent/mitigate corruption risks, 
and integrate anti-corruption into the management of public funds, 
service delivery and other sectors at national (N), subnational (SN), 
and sectoral (S) levels 
Baseline (2020): N=1, SN=5, S=3 
Target (2026):  N=3, SN=5, S=3 
Data source/frequency: Activity report/annual  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2. % of public 
policies developed with the 
participation of the 
population per year 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 50% 
 
Data source: Activity report 
National Institute for Health 
Research  
Frequency: annual 
 
Indicator 1.1.2. Extent to which State and non-State actors, 
in  democratic  governance=1, 
by  sex,  with  capacities 
accountability=2,  transparency=3,  human  rights=4,  gender 
equality=5 and transformational leadership=6, become agents 
of change 
0= poor, 1= needs improvement, 2=satisfactory, 3=high, 
4=excellent 
Baseline (2020): 1 
Target (2026): 3-5 
Data source/frequency: Activity report/Annual  
 
 
 
Indicator 1.3. % of 
achievement of legal 
frameworks in place to 
promote, enforce and monitor 
equality and non-
discrimination on the basis of 
sex in relation to:  
- Violence against women 
 Overarching legal 
frameworks and public life  
- Employment and economic 
benefits, marriage and family 
 
 
 
Data source: United Nations 
Statistical Division 
(UNSTAT)  
Frequency: annual 
 
Indicator  1.1.3.  Number  of  ministries  having  a  digital 
information system for administrative services 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 8 
Data source/frequency: Vice Prime Minister Office/annual 
 
 
21-17638 
 
 
 
9/15 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
Baseline (2020): N/A 
Target (2026): 50% 
 
Output 1.2. Improved environment, including an independent 
‘mediascape’, for political dialogue and citizen engagement to 
sustain peace and prevent violent extremism 
 
Indicator 1.2.1. Extent to which systems with strengthened 
capacities  are in  place  to  address discrimination and  racism 
and to expand civic space 
Rating scale: 0 =not-in-place, 1=work-started, 2=work in 
progress, 3=almost complete, 4=in-place  
Baseline (2020): 1 
Target (2026):  3-4 for all components 
Data source/frequency: National People’s Assembly/annual 
  
Indicator  1.2.2.  Number  of  political  party  members  with 
enhanced leadership and mediation capacities and skills  
Baseline (2020): to be determined 
Target (2026): 120 men, 40 women  
Data source/frequency: Activity report/annual 
 
Indicator  1.2.3.  %  of  women,  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual, 
transgender  and  queer  people  (LGBTQ).  and  citizens  with 
disabilities involved in political consultations 
Baseline (2020): N/A 
Target  (2026):  50%  women,  50%  men,  5%  LGBTQ,  10% 
people with disabilities 
Data source/frequency: Activity report/annual 
 
Output 1.3. Enhanced access to justice and strengthened 
capacities for national authorities and CSOs to fight impunity 
and corruption and ensure the rule of law.  
 
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of justice centres enabled to 
provide justice services, particularly for women, girls, youth, 
and vulnerable groups 
Baseline (2020): 1 justice centre built; 2 sectoral courts 
rehabilitated 
Target (2026): 2 justice centres built and equipped 
Data source/frequency: Ministry of Justice/annual 
 
Indicator 1.3.2. Existence of strengthened institutions and 
systems supporting fulfilment of nationally and 
internationally ratified human rights obligations  
10/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
Baseline (2020): 1 National Human Rights Commission 
(NHRC) not compliant with Paris Principles, no human 
rights strategic plan 
Target (2026): 1 NHRC compliant with Paris Principles, 
1 human rights strategic plan adopted   
Data source/frequency: Office of the High Commissioner for 
Refugees/annual, Ministry of Justice/annual 
 
Indicator 1.3.3. Number of people, by sex, with access to 
law and justice services 
Baseline (2021): Total 12,227; Men 9,537; Women 2,690 
Target (2026):  +20%; +20%; +20% 
Data source/frequency: Electoral Process Support Office/ 
annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: NDP, 2020-2023, objective 2. Reform the economy and promote growth and employment; 3. Develop productive sectors of the economy and 
infrastructure; 4. Enhance human capital and improve living conditions of populations; 6. Preserve biodiversity, combat climate change, and enhance natural capital. 
African Union Agenda 2063: Aspirations 1, 6, 7; SDGs 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15  
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2. By 2026, Guinea-Bissau has achieved structural economic transformation driven by enhanced 
productive capacity, value addition, blue economy and inclusive green growth that leaves no one behind, while capitalizing on small island developing States (SIDS) 
characteristics and ensuring sustainable use and protection of natural resources. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2 No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development 
Indicator 2.1. 
Unemployment rate, by sex, 
age, and persons with 
disabilities  
Baseline: (total 2019) 7.1%  
25.4% (15-24 total, 2018)  
32% (15-24 females, 2018) 
Target (2026): 4% (total) 
20% (15-24 total) 
25% (15-24 females) 
Data source: National 
Statistics Institute (INE), 
ILO,  
Frequency: annual 
Output 2.1. Enhanced national capacities to devise gender-
responsive national and sectoral plans that foster resilient, 
inclusive, and diversified economic growth, poverty reduction 
and sustainable human development. 
Regular: 9,928 
Central Bank of West 
African States 
(BCEAO) 
UNCDF 
UNICEF 
UNIDO 
World Bank 
International Monetary 
Fund 
International Poverty 
Actions 
University of Denver 
Arab Bank for 
Economic 
Development in Africa 
INE 
Guinea-Bissau 
Industrial Association 
(GBIA) 
 
Other: 76,510 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.1. Extent to which national and sectoral plans 
are gender responsive and leverage SIDS characteristics, 
promote inclusive green growth, blue economy, and integrate 
resilience and risk management.  
0=poor, 1=needs improvement, 2=satisfactory, 3=high, 
4=excellent 
Baseline (2020): 0  
Target (2026): 3 
Data source/frequency: United Nations and government 
reports/annual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2. Average 
proportion of key marine 
biodiversity areas covered by 
protected areas (%) 
Baseline (2019): 60.92% 
Target (2026): 60.92% 
 
 
Data source: UNSTAT  
Frequency:  annual 
 
 
Indicator  2.1.2.  Number  of  institutions/organizations with 
strengthened capacities in planning, accountable management, 
and monitoring and evaluation  
 
 
 
 
 
21-17638 
 
 
 
11/15 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.3. Forest area 
(% of total land area)  
Baseline (2016): 69%  
Target (2026):  69%   
Data source:  
INE, UNSTAT  
Frequency: annual 
Baseline (2019): 0 
Target (2026): 3-5 
Data source/frequency: UNDP/annual 
ECOWAS 
GEF 
Green Climate Fund 
 
 
 
Output 2.2. Capacities of private sector to contribute to 
productivity, growth, innovation, and employment are 
increased and participation of youth and women in economic 
activities enhanced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.4. % of 
vulnerable employment in 
total female employment 
Baseline (2020): 84% 
Target (2026): 70% 
 
Data source: ILO, INE 
Frequency: annual 
  
Indicator 2.2.1. Number of youth and women entrepreneurs 
with capacities built in economic activities 
Baseline (2019): 0 
Target (2026): 600 
Data source/frequency: UNDP, GBIA 
Government reports/annual 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.5. % of 
population with access to 
electricity 
Baseline (2018): 29% 
Target (2026): 50% 
 
Data source:  
INE, UNSTAT 
Frequency: annual  
 
Indicator 2.2.2. Domestic credit to private sector as % of 
gross domestic product 
Baseline (2020): 16% 
Target (2026): 18% 
Data source/frequency: Ministry of Economy and Finance-
DGSAB, World Bank, BCEAO/annual 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.2.3. of new businesses established by youth, 
LGBTQ people, and women 
Baseline (2020):  0 youth, 0 women, 0 LGBTQ 
Target (2026): 500 youth, 250 women, 50 LGBTQ 
Data source/frequency: UNDP/annual 
 
Output 2.3. Public, private and CSOs actors have enhanced 
capacities to manage disaster and climate risk in a gender-
responsive way. 
 
Indicator 2.3.1. Extent to which development strategies and 
plans are risk-informed and gender-sensitive 
0=poor, 1=needs improvement, 2=satisfactory, 3=high, 
4=excellent  
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 3-4 
Data source/frequency: United Nations reports/annual 
 
Indicator 2.3.2. Extent to which early-warning and 
preparedness measures are in place to manage impact of  
 
12/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
conflicts, disasters, pandemics, and other shocks 
0=Not in place, 1=Work started, 2=Work in progress, 
3=Work almost complete, 4=In place 
Baseline (2020): 2 
Target (2026): 4 
Data source/frequency: National reports, United Nations 
reports/annual 
 
Output 2.4. Cities/communities are equipped with tools to 
better value the natural capital and renewable energy potential 
as part of local sustainable and resilient economic development.  
 
Indicator 2.4.1. Number of new, funded partnership 
mechanisms for sustainable management solutions of natural 
resources and waste, at national or subnational level.  
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 5 
Data source/frequency: National reports, United Nations 
reports/annual 
 
Indicator 2.4.2. % of direct beneficiaries, by age and sex, 
including the most vulnerable, covered by a national early-
warning system 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 50% 
Data source/frequency: National reports, United Nations 
reports/annual 
 
Indicator 2.4.3. Number of households benefiting from 
alternative technologies and renewable energies 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 200 
Data source/frequency: National reports 
UNDP reports/annual 
 
Output 2.5. Strengthened governance of environmental and 
natural resources. 
Indicator 2.5.1. Number of innovative incentive mechanisms 
promoting rational use of scarce natural resources put in 
place  
Baseline (2020): 0  
Target (2026): 3 
Data source/frequency:  United Nations reports/national 
reports, INE/annual 
21-17638 
 
 
 
13/15 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.5.2. % of adoption and implementation of 
national and local environmental governance reforms 
Baseline (2020): 0 
Target (2026): 30% 
Data source/frequency: United Nations reports/national 
reports/annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: NDP, 2020-2023, objective 4. Enhance human capital and improve living conditions of populations 
Africa Union Agenda 2063: Aspiration 1; SDGs 3, 4, 5, 6, 16, 17 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3. By 2026, the population of Guinea-Bissau, especially the most vulnerable, will have increased and 
equitable access and use of essential quality social services, including in emergencies. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 2. No-one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development 
Indicator 3.1. % of 
Government budget 
allocated to social sectors:  
Baseline (2019): 22.2%; 
Target (2026): 35%  
Data source:  
UNPFA, UNICEF 
frequency: annual 
Output 3.1. Improved health and social services, including 
social protection schemes, to respond to citizens’ – particularly 
women and children’s – needs 
Regular: 4,700 
Other: 36,616 
UNFPA 
UNICEF 
WHO 
Global Fund 
Ministry of Health  
High Commissioner for 
COVID-19 
National 
Public Health 
Academia 
Civil society 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.1.1. % of people who tested positive for malaria 
who received treatment (by sex and age) 
Baseline (2020): Under 5, 89%; over 5, 91%;  
Male 92%. Female 90% 
Target  (2026):  Both  over  and  under  5  age  groups,  100%; 
Both male and female,100% 
Data source/frequency: District Health Information Software 
2/annual 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.2. % of births 
attended by skilled health 
worker: 
Baseline (2019): 54% 
Target (2026): 60% 
Data source: UNICEF 
Frequency: MICS/ every 4 
years  
Institute  of 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.3. % of 
household living under 
multidimensional poverty: 
Baseline (2014): 58% 
Target (2026): 54% 
Data source: UNICEF  
Frequency: annual 
Indicator  3.1.2.  An  inclusive  social  protection  framework 
and scheme in place 
Baseline (2021): No 
Target (2026): Yes 
Data  source/frequency:  national  reports,  United  Nations 
reports/every 2 years 
 
Indicator  3.1.3.  Maternal  Child  Health  indicator  under-5 
mortality, all causes (by sex) 
Baseline (2018-19): Male 59; Female 53  
Target (2026): Male 50; Female 45 
Data  source/frequency:  Multiple  Indicator  Cluster  Survey 
(MICS)/every 4 years 
 
14/15 
21-17638 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GNB/3 
 
 
 
Output 3.2. Enhanced health-seeking behaviours to manage 
vulnerability and reduce risks 
 
Indicator  3.2.1.  %  of  pregnant  women  with  4  antenatal 
consultations 
Baseline (2020): 81% 
Target (2026): 90% 
Data source/frequency: MICS/every 4 years  
  
Indicator 3.2.2. % of vulnerable groups (pregnant women 
and children under 5) and at-risk populations (general 
population) who slept under an insecticide-treated net the 
previous night 
Baseline (2020): Pregnant women, 88%, under 5, 88.5%; 
General population, 83.5% 
Target (2026): 95%, all groups. 
MICS/every 3 years 
 
21-17638 
 
 
 
15/15 
