Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale..: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 5
III. Programme and risk management: Page: 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 10
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale  
 
A.  National context and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development 
 
1.  Cuba  makes  important  efforts  to  achieve  sustainable  development  that  benefits 
Cuban women and men. Its high human development index score of 0.777 (placing it 
73rd  on  a  global  scale)1  is  the result  of  achievements  in  education,  health  and 
life expectancy.  Among the indicators  showing  better performance  than  expected 
given its level of income are: women’s representation in parliament, life expectancy, 
child malnutrition, average schooling, and pupil-teacher ratio in primary education.2 
2.  Very positive social indicators are  maintained, including an infant  mortality rate 
of 4.0 per 1,000 live births and a mortality rate in children under five of 5.4 per 1,000. 
The  average  educational  level  of  the  population  over  25  years  of  age  stands  at 
11.5 years, and school-life expectancy at 14 years.3 
3.  However, there are difficulties in maintaining the levels achieved and promoting 
sustainable development.  Despite  current  levels  of  equity,  there  are  differences 
between  and  within territories and  among population  groups.  In connection  with  the 
provincial human development index, there are differences between the provinces and 
the  capital  city,  with  the  eastern  region  facing  the  most  unfavourable  situation.  The 
country  recognizes  the  need  to  cover,  in  a  specific  and  differentiated  manner, 
population  groups  under  vulnerability  conditions 4  in  selected  territories.  There  is  a 
need to reduce gender gaps in productive chains, priority sectors and decision -making 
bodies  at  the  local  level;  contribute  to  modifying  stereotypes  that  limit  the 
empowerment of women and lesbian, gay, transgender, bisexual and intersex people; 
further apply the gender approach  to territorial planning and development processes; 
and  strengthen  gender  statistics  and  analysis  in  all  sustainable  development 
dimensions. The strengthening of spaces and mechanisms for the full exercise of the  
rights  of  people  who  suffer  stigma  and  discrimination  on  the  grounds  of  gender 
identity, sexual diversity or serological status remains a priority.  
4.  Externally,  the  global  economic  and  financial  context  and  the  intensification  of 
the  economic,  commercial  and  financial  embargo  imposed  by  the  United  States  of 
America substantially affect the country and limit its access to international  financial 
sources and markets. Cuba considers that the blockade policy poses a major obstacle 
to the implementation of the National Economic and Social Development Plan and  of 
the 2030 Agenda – including the 17 Sustainable Development Goals – by 2030. 
5.  A  principal  task  is  to  achieve  a  prosperous  and  efficient  economy,  but  the 
economic growth rate remains below the 5 per cent level, with gross domestic product 
growth  averaging  1.5  per  cent  between  2016  and  2018.  Despite  the  efforts  made, 
technological gaps in the production system and mechanisms limit the development 
of  efficient  chains.  Key  economic  sectors,  such  as  agriculture,  have  not  achieved 
sustained growth.  Considering  the  high  dependence  on  fossil  fuel  imports  (2,843.2 
millitons  in  2017)  and  low  efficiency  in  the  use  of  energy  carriers,  improved 
efficiency and increased use of renewable energy sources by up to 24 per cent in the 
energy  matrix  by 2030 remains a priority. The pressure  on the balance  of trade  has 
been maintained, and the country spends over one billion dollars every year on food 
imports. Fuel imports add to the pressure. 
                                                           
1 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2018 
2 UNDP, Human Development Report for Latin America and the Caribbean, 2016 
3 UNDP, Human Development Report, 2017  
4 Including pregnant women, girls, boys and older people 
2 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
6.  As the country lacks access to international financial institutions, it has to make 
significant efforts not to increase debt levels and to honour payment  commitments. 
Foreign investment, which is strategic for development,  remains insufficient. There 
is a recognized need for mechanisms that may contribute to its revitalization. 
7.  The  high  housing  deficit,  estimated  at  929,000  dwellings, 5  is  aggravated  by 
recurrent  high-intensity  hurricanes.  Despite 
in 
comprehensive disaster risk management, the losses caused by the last two hurricanes  
(Matthew  in  2016  and  Irma  in  2017)  amounted  to  over  $15.6  billion, 6  with  most 
damage inflicted on the housing and agricultural sectors. There has been an increase 
in  drought  periods,  coastal  flooding  due  to  rising  sea  levels,  and  extreme  hydro-
meteorological  events,  causing  damage  to  the  population  and  the  economy.  The 
earthquake  hazard  is  latent,  mainly  in  the  eastern  region  of  the  country,  which 
demands resilient housing. 
the  country’s  preparedness 
8.  The  population  age  structure  shows  a  high  level  of  aging  (20.1  per  cent  of  the 
people  are  60  years  old  or  above),  while  the  gross  reproduction  rate  has  remained 
below  the  replacement  level  for  four  decades.  This  has  had  an  impact  on  growth 
patterns and economic contributions. Economic limitations have negatively affected 
the dynamics  of  social  development, requiring optimization  in  the  use of resources 
for social services. They have also put pressure on health, social protection and care 
services, particularly with respect to quality and sustainability, and ensuring the care 
of specific population groups and those in vulnerability situations.  
9.  To  address  those  challenges,  the  Cuban  government  continues  to  update  its 
economic  and  social  models.  The  preservation  of  social  achievements  and  the  full 
development  of  human  beings  –  leaving  nobody  unprotected  –  are  ratified  as 
priorities. Key programmatic documents for national strategic planning conceptualize 
the  development  model,  setting  priorities  and  lines  of  action.  They  are  the 
Conceptualization  of  the  Cuban  Economic  and  Social  Development  Model,  the 
update of the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines, 2016-2021, and the bases for 
the National Economic and Social Development Plan (known as PNDES) until 2030. 
10.  The  plan,  adopted  in  2017,  identifies  six  strategic  areas:  socialist,  effective, 
efficient  and  socially 
transformation  and 
international  integration;  infrastructure;  human  potential,  science,  technology  and 
innovation;  natural resources  and environment; and  human  developmen t and  social 
equity and justice, as well as six major economic sectors (without neglecting others) 
in  a  first  stage  between  2019  and  2021.  They  are:  tourism,  biotechnological  and 
renewables; 
pharmaceutical 
construction;  and  professional  services.  At  the  sectoral  level,  priorities  focus  on 
stimulating food production, housing, sustainable tourism, and computerization. All 
this  goes  hand  in  hand  with  protection  and  rational  use  of  natural  resources, 
conservation of ecosystems, environmental quality, and reduction of vulnerabilities 
to the impact of climate change and extreme hydro-meteorological events under the 
State plan to confront climate change (‘Task-Life’).7 Efforts will be made to address 
issues  such  as  demographic  dynamics,  population  aging,  and  care  services.  The 
development model is  being updated and, after a broad process of consultation, the 
new  Constitution  was  approved  in  2019  to  legitimize  citizen s’  rights,  promote 
recognition  of  and  respect  for  family  diversity,  and  improve  ways  of  coping  with 
integrated  government;  productive 
sector, 
food  production; 
energy,  particularly 
                                                           
5 Ministry of Construction, Cuban Housing Policy  
6 National Office of Statistics and Information, Environmental Outlook, 2017  
7 Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. 
 
3 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
 
gender  violence  situations.  The  environmental  sustainability  approach  will  be 
incorporated  and  the  right  to  a  healthy  environment  protected.  The  plan  grants 
municipal governments greater powers to promote local development; redefines the 
functions of provincial governments; and redesigns the structure and functions of the 
Government.8  
11.  In  2019,  Cuba  presented  its  first  progress  report  on  the  implementation  of  the 
Sustainable Development Goals, reaffirming that “the adoption of the 2030 Agenda 
is  a  State  commitment,  a  national  priority  that  receives  a  practical  response  in  the 
alignment of the 17 Goals with the strategic areas contained in the National Plan”.9 A 
national group  was established  by  ministerial resolution  under the leadership of the 
Ministry of Economy. It is composed of national entities and representatives of civil 
society organizations in charge of Goals implementation, and territorial groups  were 
established  to  follow  up  on  the  2030 Agenda.  Efforts  are  being  made  to  strengthen 
information and statistical systems in support of decision-making under a process that 
seeks to update the economic model and monitor the 2030 Agenda. 
B.  Lessons learned 
12.  Two  performance  evaluations,  one  evaluation  of 
the  United  Nations 
Development Assistance  Framework,  one  evaluation  of  the  cooperation  programme 
and 11 project evaluations were conducted between 2014 and 2019. The evalua tion of 
the United Nations Development Assistance Framework  highlighted the interagency 
initiatives that mobilized additional resources and achieved greater articulation with 
national institutions. UNDP was involved in six joint initiatives, including five as the 
lead agency. The report stressed that several cooperation partners had praised UNDP 
delivery  capacity  and  inter-agency  complementarities  in  disaster  response  and 
recovery,  which  maximized impact.  UNDP participated in  three  inter-agency  action 
plans.  The  evaluation  report  highlighted  that  the  logic  of  establishing  platforms, 
especially  the  articulated  platform  for  integrated  territorial  development  (known  as 
PADIT) was valued by the country and by the agencies concerned.  
13.  The  independent  country  programme  evaluation  in  Cuba  recognized  that 
“UNDP’s long-standing presence, territorial coverage and partnership  with national 
and  local  governments  have  strategically  positioned  it  as  a  trusted  and  respected 
development partner that has efficiently  implemented innovative projects and added 
value  to  the  development  and  implementation  of  national  policies  and  strategies  in 
key and at times sensitive and new areas through technical advice of the highly skilled 
local staff and partners and UNDP’s global network”. 
14.  The report also recognized that “UNDP is perceived as a strategic partner. The 
continuity of its programme in specific thematic areas and  geographic locations, and 
the  close  partnership  with  the  government,  at  the  national  and  local  levels,   have 
helped  position  UNDP  as  a  ‘go-to  agency’  By  supporting  South-South  cooperation 
mechanisms, UNDP has facilitated timely access to knowledge and experiences, and 
has generated and promoted better articulation between national and local actors”. 
15.  UNDP contributed to the development and implementation of the energy policy 
and community access to electricity based on renewable sources of energy, and to the 
development of policies, standards, and methodologies on biodiversity, climate change 
and  environmental  sustainability,  as  well  as  the  implementation  of  those  policies  in 
territories  and  economic  sectors.  The  development  of  the  value-chain  management 
                                                           
8 Ministry of Economy, National Assembly of People’s Power 
9 Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. 
4 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
approach for food products was also key, leading to a reported increase in productivity 
and a reduction in imports. 
16.  UNDP  support  for  decentralization  facilitated  the  institutionalization  of  work  
methodologies and local planning and positioned  UNDP to continue supporting local 
development.  Its  response  to  and  support  of  early  hurricane  recovery  reaffirmed 
important lessons in risk prevention and resilience building. UNDP collaboration with 
the  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund  (UNICEF), 
the  Pan-American  Health 
Organization (PAHO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) contributed to Cuba 
becoming, in 2015, the first country to eliminate mother-to-child transmission of HIV. 
UNDP  supported  the  national  HIV  response  programme  by  strengthening  national 
health networks and strategic planning, monitoring and response capa cities. 
17.  UNDP helped to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment – and to 
integrate that perspective into local development plans – and supported the design and 
implementation  of  institutional  gender  strategies.  Its  work  was  recognized  with  the 
Gender Equality Gold Seal in 2013, 2014 and 2018. 
18.  Recognition  of  the  need  to  strengthen  cooperation  in  energy  and  seismic  risk 
prevention,  and  to  apply  the  population  and  gender  approach  in  greater  depth, 
contributed to transformational changes in equity. Those lessons are incorporated into 
the present programme. 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships 
19.  This  programme  contributes  to  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development 
Cooperation  Framework  that  was  agreed  between  Cuba  and  the  United  Nations 
system,  and  addresses  the  strategic  priorities  of  the  country  expressed  in  the  2030 
National  Economic  and  Social  Development  Plan  and  the  progress  towards  the 
Sustainable  Development  Goals.  Expected  results  are  based  on  an  extensive 
involving  national  and  territorial  actors, 
consultation  and  exchange  process 
representatives  of  ministries,  territorial  governments,  institutions,  academ ia,  civil 
society,  and  cooperation  partners.  Each  expected  result  will  prioritize  a  multi-
dimensional  development  approach  combining  economic  improvement,  people’s 
well-being and empowerment, sustainable management of natural resources,  climate 
change adaptation and  mitigation, and comprehensive risk management. UNDP will 
promote  articulation  between  state,  non-state,  civil-society  and  community-based 
organizations whose actions contribute to change. 
20.  The gender approach, the empowerment of women, generational issues, and the 
territorial approach will all be considered cross-cutting issues. Innovation, technology 
and  knowledge  transfer,  and  South-South  cooperation  will  be  key  areas  under  the 
programme. 
21.  The expected results under the programme will inform the UNDP Strategic Plan, 
2018-2021.  United  Nations  organizations  will  become 
important  partners, 
contributing  experience  and  know-how.  Special  follow-up  will  be  provided  to  the 
common  chapter.  Building  on  the  vision  of  the  2030  Agenda  and  the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals,  partnerships  will  be  promoted  and  strengthened.  UNDP will 
continue facilitating access to instruments and tools t hat support national efforts for 
articulation of and follow-up to the Goals, and for capacity-building. 
A.  National and local governments and institutions implement comprehensive, 
sustainable, equitable and inclusive territorial development strategies within the 
framework of the decentralization process 
5 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
 
22.  UNDP  will  support  the  implementation  of  the  new  Constitution  through 
capacity-building 
territorial  governments;  application  of  planning  and 
management tools with a cross-sectoral vision that takes into account the sustainable 
management  of  natural  resources  and  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation ; 
diversification  and  complementarity  of  financial  sources;  and  the  strengthening  of 
relationships  between  development  actors  under  a  renewed  public-private  vision, 
incorporating  cooperatives  and  self-employed  women  and  men  into  development 
strategies.  Local  development  support  centres  will  be  expanded,  as  an  innovative 
information  management, 
experience 
communication and computerization, citizen participation, and the integration of the 
population,  gender-  and rights-based  approaches  into development  strategies.  In the 
framework of the third upgrade of the national education system, UNDP will contribute to 
strengthening  technical  and  professional  training  as  part  of  the  local  development 
processes promoted by municipal governments. 
for 
for  government-university  articulation, 
23.  The  articulated  platform  for  integrated  territorial  development  will  enable  the 
establishment  of  new  partnerships,  exchanges  and  methodologies  aligned  with  the 
2030 National Plan and the  Sustainable Development Goals. National and territorial 
Goals laboratories will include tools for information management, the identification 
of  strengths  and  challenges,  and  decision-making.  The  laboratories  will  be  made 
available to the United Nations system to better articulate Goals-related cooperation. 
The  methodologies  developed  by  the  articulated  platform  for  integrated  territorial 
development  will  be  implemented  by  all  the  municipalities  and  provinces  in  the 
country, in partnership with the Ministry of Economy. 
24.  In  support  of  multisectoral  decision-making,  UNDP,  in  alliance  with  the 
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) will contribute 
to  enhancing  the  capacities  of  the  national  statistical  system  and  to  the  developing 
more  robust  information  and  statistics,  following  international,  disaggregated, 
gender-sensitive standards. The National Statistics Office and UNDP will promote the 
introduction of multidimensional indexes, unprecedented in the country, applying the 
methodology of the global Multidimensional Poverty Index. Support will be provided 
to  designing  a  national  index  and  territorial  human  development  measurements  in 
support of welfare policies. The Ministry of Environment and UNDP will promote the 
establishment  of  an  environmental  information  system,  and  the  reinforcement  of 
environmental  statistics  with  methodological  tools  for  the  valuation  of  ecosystem 
goods  and  services  and  the  implementation  of  targeted  scenario  analyses  to  better 
apply the sustainability approach to economic decision-making. 
25.  The new country programme will promote partnerships  with ECLAC, UNFPA, 
UNICEF,  the  World  Food  Programme  (WFP)  and  the  United  Nations  Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization to meet the above priorities. 
B.  Nationally  prioritized  strategic  sectors  achieve  higher  levels  of  economic 
productivity and the rational use of human potential 
 
26.  UNDP,  in  alliance  with  FAO,  UNIDO  and  UNFPA,  will  support  the  strategic 
sectors and areas identified in the National Plan, 2030, using the production and value 
chain approach, increased efficiency and production volumes, new organizational and 
cross-sectoral  governance  processes,  technology  transfer,  promotion  of  renewable 
energy sources and energy efficiency, introduction of climate change adaptation and 
mitigation measures, and adoption of sustainable practices. The agri-food sector will 
be prioritized, particularly at the territorial level, through municipal supply plans.  
27.  UNDP  will  encourage  gender  equality  and  the  implementation  of  affirmative 
measures for the empowerment of rural women; and the creation of jobs  for women 
6 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
and  men  will  be  stimulated  under  equity  conditions.  The  population  approach  to 
economic development plans will be promoted.  
28.  UNDP  will  support  strengthening  the  capacities  of  actors  and  institutions  to 
manage various financial sources, expanding development options at the national and 
territorial  levels  and  mechanisms  to  encourage  financial  flows  to  the  country.  The 
capacities of the  Central Bank of Cuba and commercial banks  will be strengthened, 
providing  knowledge and  tools on  macroeconomic  and  monetary policy  issues,  and 
promoting greater financial education and inclusion, as well as microcredit, in support 
of  business  plans  and  house  and  building  refurbishing  plans.  In  the  new  country 
programme, innovative financial solutions for the sustainable management of natural 
resources and environmentally sustainable production practices will be implemented. 
29.  In connection  with the above issues, the new  country programme  will catalyse 
partnerships  with  UNFPA,  the  Food  and Agriculture  Organization (FAO), WFP,  the 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization ( UNIDO) and ECLAC.  
C. 
Institutions,  production  and  service  sectors,  territorial  governments  and 
communities  improve  the  protection  and  rational  use  of  natural  resources  and 
ecosystems,  resilience  to  climate  change,  and  comprehensive  disaster  risk  reduction 
management 
 
30.  The conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, and the response to 
climate change, will continue to be a priority. UNDP will promote the application of 
natural  solutions  for  climate  change  adaptation,  mainly  in  coastal  areas.  They  will 
improve  the  quality  of  life  for  people,  preserve  the  infrastructure,  and  protect 
underground water-supply sources and arable land from saline intrusion. 
31.  The application of production practices that promote sustainability and climate 
change  adaptation,  and  the  consolidation  of  sustainable  land  management  will  be 
stimulated by UNDP in a cross-cutting manner to provide for landscape connectivity 
(between natural and agricultural, mainly agro-pastoral and agroforestry ecosystems). 
UNDP  will  also  promote  an  integrated  approach  to  water  management,  financial 
solutions in support of biodiversity conservation, and sustainable use and ecosystem 
services. 
32.  UNDP  will  strengthen  the  capacities  of  national  and  local  governments  and 
actors to plan, invest and make decisions through the provision of tools for managing 
natural  resources  at  the  local  level.  The  tools  will  incorporate  climate  change 
adaptation  and  comprehensive  disaster  risk  management  to  benefit  people  and 
promote  more  resilient  communities.  UNDP  will  promote  the  systematization  of 
methodological and management solutions for early warning systems at the national 
and territorial levels, and the mainstreaming of gender perspective into disaster risk 
management and climate change adaptation measures. 
33.  Considering the damage caused by hurricanes and other extreme weather events, 
UNDP will support the early recovery approach. The promotion of resilient housing, 
the restoration  of  livelihoods,  and  the  production of  building  materials  that  involve 
the  use of  local resources  and  generate  jobs  for  young  people  will  continue  to  be  a 
priority. UNDP will articulate its activities with the action plans agreed upon with the 
country. 
34.  UNDP will promote the use of renewable energy sources in economic and social 
activities  and  rural  housing,  and  will  encourage  less  carbon-intensive  development 
models  at  the  municipal  level.  They  will  favour  greater  use  of  renewable  energy 
sources and higher energy efficiency. 
7 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
 
35.  UNDP  will  encourage  partnerships  with  WFP,  UNICEF,  UNIDO,  FAO,  UN-
Habitat, 
the  International 
Organization for Migration to meet the above priorities. 
the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme  and 
Improved  accessibility  and  quality  of  public  services  and  social  protection  and 
D. 
care  systems,  considering  demographic  dynamics,  with  an  emphasis  on  vulnerable 
groups and applying a gender and human-rights approach 
 
36.  In  support  of  the  ‘leaving  nobody  unprotected’  national  priority,  UNDP  will 
strengthen  the  capacities  of  national,  territorial  and  community-based  actors  to 
provide  accessible,  high-quality  public  services,  including  care,  for  the  benefit  of 
people. To  that  end,  UNDP  will  encourage  innovation,  participation  in  association-
based schemes and multisectoral care services that benefit vulnerable groups (with an 
emphasis  on  older  and  disabled  people)  and  help  bridge  gender  gaps  and  promote 
women’s  empowerment  will  be  encouraged.  UNDP  and  UNFPA  will  promote  the 
incorporation  of  demographic  dynamics  analysis  in  economic  and  social  decision -
making. UNDP will encourage gender equality and women’s empowerment in a cross-
cutting manner. 
37.  UNDP  will  actively  continue  to  support  the  sustainability  of  the  national  HIV 
response,  health  care  system  programmes  that provide people  living  with  HIV  with 
equitable  access  to  diagnosis,  care,  treatment,  follow-up  and  support  services,  and 
comprehensive prevention programmes for key population groups (men who have sex 
with men, persons practicing transactional sex, and transgender) as an integral part of 
the process of empowering civil-society networks. The social determinants that limit 
access of  lesbian,  gay,  transgender, bisexual  and intersex  people to  services  will  be 
further addressed in the new country programme. 
38.  UNDP will promote the creation of jobs for young people, particularly through 
higher-quality technical and professional training, designing specialties and curricula 
in  line  with  territorial  development  strategies  and  job  demand,  also  meeting  the 
expectations  of  youth.  UNDP,  in  coordination  with  the  Ministry  of  Education,  will 
incentivize the scaling up of this experience. 
39.  UNDP will foster partnerships with UNFPA, UNICEF, WFP, PAHO, WHO, UN-
Women,  the  International  Labour  Organization  and  other  United  Nations  system 
organizations to meet the above priorities. 
III.  Programme and risk management 
40.  The programme will be implemented under the coordination of the Ministry of 
Foreign Trade and Investment (MINCEX), which is the lead agency for international 
cooperation, using the national execution modality. Projects will be implemented by 
the  national  and  local  institutions  that  will  be  primarily  responsible  for  delivering 
results.  UNDP  will  contribute  to  this  effort.  A  wider  range  of  actors  will  be 
encouraged to participate in the entire process. 
41.  At the request of the Government, other implementation modalities may be used, 
including direct implementation of the programme, either partially or completely, by 
UNDP  and  the  provision  of  support  services  for  the  national  implementation  of 
specific projects or activities.  
42.  To manage financial risks, the Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be 
used  in  coordination  with  other  United  Nations  organizations.  Pursuant  to  decision 
2013/9, all direct costs associated with  project implementation should be charged to 
the projects concerned. 
8 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
43.  This  country  programme  document  outlines  UNDP  contributions  to  national 
development results and priorities, and serves as the primary unit of accountability to 
the Executive Board for results alignment and resources allocation to the programme 
at the country level. Accountability by managers at headquarters, regional and country 
levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the UNDP programme and 
operations policies and procedures and the internal control framework. 
44.  UNDP  will  work  in  coordination  with  other  United  Nations  organizations, 
including ECLAC. In particular,  UNDP will promote joint projects and actions with 
UNFPA  and  UNICEF  in  response  to  the  common  chapter  of  the  Strategic  Plan. 
Existing  and  new  cooperation  partnerships  will  continue  to  be  encouraged.  UNDP 
will provide its capabilities for the multidimensional approach to development at  the 
national  and  territorial  levels  and  for  the  articulation  of  actors  under  common 
platforms,  as  well  as  its  operational  service  capability  for  the  implementation  of 
projects and actions agreed upon. It will also provide technical advisory services with 
the support of global and regional expert networks and will further promote access to 
multilateral funds. UNDP  will continue to offer operational support services, mainly 
for the coordination of the United Nations system in financial, procurement, human-
resources and information technology issues. 
45.  The  UNDP  office  in  Cuba  has  adopted  the  measures  needed  to  meet  the 
requirements  of  the  new  cooperation  programme  and  has  the  human  and  technical 
capacity  to  deal  with  substantive  and  operational  issues.  It  will  promote  greater 
efficiency in operations and build on its global and regional capacity and systematized 
experiences in other countries.  Priority will be given to the risks that  could have an 
adverse  effect  on  programme  implementation,  such  as  damage  caused  by  extreme 
weather  events.  Likewise,  priority  will  be  assigned  to  the  various  phases  of 
programme implementation in coordination with key counterparts,  devising practical 
solutions  for  smoother  implementation.  All  risk  management  actions  will  be 
monitored and appropriately updated using institutional and UNDP platforms. 
46.  UNDP  will  continue  to  support  existing  partnerships  with  multilateral  and 
bilateral  partners,  promote  access  to  global  vertical  funds,  expand  links  with  non -
traditional  partners,  and  supply  regular  resources  that  will  be  used,  upon  mutual 
agreement between UNDP and the Government, as a catalyst for strategic initiatives 
in support of the priorities established in this programme. For the 2020-2024 period, 
the goal is to contribute $1.7 million in regular resources (TRAC 1.1.1) and generate 
an additional $100.6 million. At the time of writing, 76 per cent is already available 
or in the process of final approval, and 24 per cent is being negotiated. 
47.  The Government of Cuba has expressed and ratified its interest in strengthening 
its  partnership  with  UNDP,  considering  the  added  value  of  its  programmes  and 
projects. 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
48.  A  monitoring  and  evaluation  plan  will  be  implemented  to  assess  UNDP 
contributions  to  sustainable  development  in  Cuba.  The  programme  monitoring  and 
evaluation  will  be  coordinated  with  the  Government,  as  well  as  with  the  national 
implementing  entities.  UNDP  will  collaborate  with  the  Ministry  of  Economy  and 
Planning  and  with  the  National  Office  of  Statistics  and  Information  to  support  and 
build  upon  data  collection  and  information  systems  in  place  to  measure  progress 
towards  sustainable  development.  The  gender  marker  will  provide  a  key  tool  for 
designing programmes and projects that promote gender equity and contribute to the 
9 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
 
elimination of structural barriers and stereotypes that hinder equality between women, 
men and people discriminated against because of their gender identities. 
49.  Through  its  joint  results  groups,  UNDP  will  help  gather  information  on 
indicators,  in  accordance  with  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  plan  of  the  United 
Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  Framework.  Official  sources  of 
information,  databases  and  reports  of  various  projects  and  ministries  will  be  used 
where appropriate and necessary. 
 
10 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Cuba (2020-2024) 
National priority: An effective, efficient, socially integrated government  
United  Nations  Cooperation  Framework  outcome:  National  and  local  governments  and  institutions  implement  comprehensive,  sustainable,  equitable  and 
inclusive territorial development strategies within the framework of the decentralization process 
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, outcome: Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions 
Outcome 
indicators, 
baselines and 
targets of the 
United Nations 
Cooperation 
Framework 
Check source, frequency 
of data collection and 
responsibilities 
Indicative UNDP country programme outputs  
Major partners / partnerships 
and frameworks 
Resources 
 
Output 1.1. Strengthened capacities of national and local 
government and institutions to plan, manage and 
implement decentralization processes based on citizen 
participation 
MEP  
Ministry of Justice 
Ministry of Finance and Prices 
(MFP) 
Ministry of Labour and Social 
Security (MTSS) 
Ministry of Tourism (MINTUR) 
Central Bank of Cuba  
Territorial governments 
Academia – Research centres 
Non-governmental organizations  
Regular 
$456,000 
 
 
Integrated results 
and resources 
framework (IRRF) 
1.2.1.2 
1.1.4 Number of 
inclusive local 
economic 
development 
strategies and plans 
in place:  
(a) With 
institutional 
frameworks for 
implementation in 
local and regional 
governments  
Project reports:  
 
 
Reports of the National 
Office of Statistics and 
Information (ONEI) 
Other 
$5,942,226 
 
Indicator 1.1.1 Number of local governments with 
territorially designed comprehensive, inclusive development 
strategies/plans 
Baseline: 10 at the provincial level and 32 at the municipal 
level  
Target: 15 and 100, respectively 
 
 
 
Progress reports on 
sustainable development 
goals 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual frequency 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.2 Number of initiatives created in support of 
the decentralization process 
Baseline: 20  
Target: 70  
 
 
 
 
Responsible agencies:  
 
 
 
UNDP 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.3 Number of territories and institutions 
implementing new mechanisms for citizen participation 
and/or gender equity 
Baseline: 10 territories and 15 institutions 
Target: 15 and 35  
 
 
 
Baseline: (a) 3  
Target: (a) 8  
Project offices 
 
 
 
ONEI  
 
 
IRRF 1.1.1 
1.1.1.3 Number of 
data collection/ 
analysis 
mechanisms 
 
 
Ministry of Economy 
and Planning (MEP)  
 
 
Output 1.2. Strengthened capacities of the national and 
territorial statistical and information system, applying an 
innovative, gender-sensitive approach disaggregated by 
 
 
 
ONEI 
 
11 
 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
DP/DCP/ 
DP/DCP/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
providing 
disaggregated data 
to monitor progress 
towards the SDGs: 
(a) Conventional 
data collection 
methods (e.g., 
surveys)  
(b) Administrative 
reporting systems, 
new data sources 
(e.g., big data)  
(c) New data source 
(e.g., big data)  
sex, age and geographical location in support of the 
update of the economic and social model and the 
monitoring of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
MEP 
Institute of Physical Planning (IPF) 
Ministries  
Territorial governments  
Academia – Research centres 
Federation of Cuban Women  
 
 
 
Indicator 1.2.1 Number of new indexes and methodologies, 
with a population and gender approach, under implementation  
Baseline: 2 
Target: 6 
 
 
  
 
(a)  
Baseline: 3 
Target: 5  
(b)  
Baseline: 2  
Target: 6 
(c)  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 1  
National priority: Productive transformation 
United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome: Nationally prioritized strategic sectors achieve higher levels of economic productivity and rational use of 
human potential  
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, outcome: Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development 
IRFF 2.1.1 
2.1.1.2 Number of 
public-private 
partnerships at 
national level to 
improve the enabling 
framework for 
economic 
diversification and 
green growth 
Baseline: 13 
Target: 33 
Local governments 
Ministry of Agriculture (MINAG) 
Ministry of Food Industry (MINAL) 
Ministry of Domestic Trade  
MEP 
Ministry of Science, Technology and 
Environment (CITMA) 
Ministry of Construction (MICONS) 
MINTUR 
Ministry of Higher Education (MES) 
ONEI  
IPF 
Output 2.1.  
Strengthened local sustainable value chains in priority 
sectors, with emphasis on agri-food sectors for self-
sufficiency, and mechanisms in place for cross-sectoral 
integration, sustainable energy use and improved job 
quality, with gender and generational equity 
Regular 
$436,000 
Project reports:  
 
Reports  of  the  National 
Office  of  Statistics  and 
Information 
 
Other 
$20,230,015 
 
 
Reports of ministries and 
other institutions  
 
 
Indicator 2.1.1 Number of local productive chains 
strengthened: 
Baseline: 9  
Target: 15 
 
 
 
Annual frequency 
 
 
 
Responsible agencies:  
 
 
12 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
Non-governmental organizations 
Indicator 2.1.2 Number of municipalities increasing the 
production volumes of local foodstuffs and other priority 
products 
Baseline: 0 
Target:13 
 
 
 
UNDP 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Project offices 
 
 
 
 
 
ONEI 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.3 Number of people (disaggregated by age 
and sex) benefitting from new, better jobs and strengthened 
services  
Baseline: 800 
Target: 2.100  
 
 
 
Ministries  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 2.1.4 Number of initiatives using renewable 
sources of energy and implementing actions to improve 
energy efficiency 
Baseline: 76  
Target: 146  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Output 2.2. Strengthened capacities of key institutions 
and actors to manage financing in support of the 
development of priority sectors, including foreign direct 
investment 
Ministry  of  Foreign  Trade  and 
Investment 
Central Bank of Cuba 
MFP 
MEP 
CITMA 
MINAG 
Azcuba Business Group 
BioCubaFarma Business Group 
 
Indicator 2.2.1 Number of new financial methodologies, 
tools and solutions adapted or implemented  
Baseline: 5  
Target: 10  
 
Indicator 2.2.2 Volume of financial resources mobilized in 
partnership with key actors  
Baseline: $110 million  
Target: $210 million 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
DP/DCP/ 
DP/DCP/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National priority: Natural resources and environment 
United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome: Institutions, production and service sectors, territorial governments and communities improve the protection 
and rational use of natural resources and ecosystems, resilience to climate change, and comprehensive disaster risk reduction management 
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, outcome: Build resilience to stress and crises 
IRRF 1.4.1.2-3.1.4 
Natural resources that 
are managed under a 
sustainable use, 
conservation, access 
and benefit-sharing 
regime  
(a) Area of land and 
marine habitat under 
protection (in hectares 
- ha) 
(b) Area of existing 
protected area under 
improved management 
(ha) 
(d) Area under 
sustainable forest 
management (ha) 
Project reports  
Output 3.1. Strengthened capacities of key actors for 
sustainable management of natural resources and 
ecosystems and improved environmental quality 
CITMA 
MINAG 
MINAL 
National Institute of Hydraulic 
Resources 
MEP 
MFP 
MINTUR  
Azcuba Business Group 
Regular 
$396,000 
 
Reports of the National 
Office of Statistics and 
Information 
 
 
Other 
$65,893,147 
Indicator 3.1.1 Number of territories implementing 
environmentally sustainable production practices 
Baseline: 213  
Target: 237  
  
 
 
 
Reports of the National 
Civil Defence General 
Staff 
 
Indicator 3.1.2 Number of financing solutions developed and 
implemented 
Baseline: 1 
Target: 6  
 
 
 
Reports of local 
governments  
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.1.3 Number of methodologies and tools 
Baseline: 2 
Target: 7  
Annual frequency 
 
 
 
Responsible agencies:  
 
 
 
 
UNDP 
Output 3.2 Strengthened capacities of key actors for 
comprehensive management at national and territorial 
levels for disaster risk reduction and adaptation to climate 
change, incorporating gender and population perspective 
National Civil Defence General 
Staff 
CITMA 
Environment Agency 
MINAG 
National Institute of Hydraulic 
Resources  
Institute of Meteorology  
MICONS  
MINTUR 
Local governments 
 
Baseline:  
(a) 2,916,990 ha 
(b) 2,916,990 ha 
(d) 0 Ha  
Target:  
(a) 3,240,935 ha  
(b) 3,240,935 ha 
(d) 329,509.34 ha  
 
Project offices 
 
ONEI 
 
Indicator 3.2.1 Number of tools, procedures and 
methodologies, including gender- and generation-sensitive 
early warning systems, implemented and transferred under 
South-South cooperation 
Baseline: 67 implemented and 6 for South-South cooperation  
Target: 107 and 12, respectively  
 
National Civil Defence 
General Staff 
 
Local governments 
 
 
IRRF 2.3.1.1-3.2.4 
Number of data-
informed development 
and investment plans 
that incorporate 
integrated solutions to 
reduce disaster risks 
  
 
Indicator 3.2.2 Number of people, disaggregated by sex and 
age, who increase their knowledge of climate change 
adaptation and comprehensive disaster risk management at all 
levels 
Baseline: 608,200 (304,100 women) 
Target: 3,316,959 (1,354,379 women) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
 
and enable climate 
change adaptation and 
mitigation 
 
 
Indicator 3.2.3 Number of key territories, hectares, 
ecosystems and actors implementing climate change 
adaptation and disaster risk prevention measures and plans 
Baseline: 11 municipalities, 3,659 Ha ecosystems, 17 actors 
Target: 60, 22,318 and 30, respectively 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: 12 
Target: 25  
 
 
 
 
 
Output 3.3. Energy efficiency increased and development 
of renewable sources of energy promoted to help mitigate 
climate change, ensuring inclusive economic and social 
development 
 
 
IRRF 1.5.1.1-3.3.4 
Number of households 
benefiting from access 
to clean, affordable 
and sustainable energy 
(b) in rural areas  
 
 
Ministry of Energy and Mines 
CITMA 
MINAG 
MES 
MEP  
ONEI 
Azcuba Business Group 
Local governments 
 
Indicator 3.3.1 Number of communities increasing the use of 
renewable sources of energy and improving energy efficiency  
Baseline: 6 
Target: 31 
 
Baseline: 1,233  
Target: 2,060  
 
Indicator 3.3.2 Number of sectors and territories, including 
human settlements, implementing less carbon-intensive 
development initiatives  
Baseline: 2 sectors and 5 municipalities  
Target: 3 and 15, respectively 
 
 
 
IRRF 1.3.1.1-3.4.3 
Number of recovery 
plans and systems in 
place utilizing sex-, 
age- and disability- 
disaggregated data and 
gender analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.3.3 Number of initiatives developed to support 
national capacity to honour Paris Agreement commitments 
Baseline: 2  
Target: 5  
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: 6 
Target: 8  
 
 
Output 3.4 Strengthened capacities of key actors for 
disaster response and early recovery 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.4.1 Number of people benefitting from 
livelihoods, securing basic habitability in houses and shelters, 
services, vital production and indispensable infrastructure in 
population settlements, disaggregated by sex, age and 
vulnerable groups 
Baseline: 273,927 (136,963 women) 
Target: 378,617 (189,308 women) 
National Civil Defence General 
Staff  
CITMA 
MINAG 
IPF 
MICONS  
Local governments 
 
 
15 
 
 
DP/DCP/CUB/3 
DP/DCP/ 
DP/DCP/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 3.4.2 Number of strategic sectors in the territory 
strengthening their production capacities through technology 
transfer and technical training to ensure early recovery and 
further development 
Baseline: 7 
Target: 14  
National priority: Human development and social equity and justice 
United Nations Cooperation Framework outcome: Improved accessibility and quality of public services and social protection and care systems, considering 
population dynamics, with emphasis on vulnerable groups, applying a gender and human-rights approach 
Strategic Plan, 2018-2021, outcome: Eradicate poverty in all its forms and dimensions 
IRFF 1.2.1  
1.2.1.1 Number of 
subnational 
governments 
improving capacities 
to plan, budget, 
manage and monitor 
basic services 
Project reports  
Output 4.1. Strengthened capacities of national, 
territorial and community-based actors to provide 
accessible, high-quality public and care services, 
considering demographic dynamics, applying a gender 
and human rights approach 
MTSS 
Ministry of Public Health  
Territorial governments 
Ministry of Education  
Civil society networks connected 
with STI/HIV national response 
Federation of Cuban Women  
National Institute of Hydraulic 
Resources 
Regular 
$694,000 
  
Annual frequency 
 
 
Other 
$8,600,003 
Responsible entities:  
 
 
 
UNDP 
 
Indicator 4.1.1 Number of national, territorial and 
community-based actors strengthening their capacities to 
provide public and care services applying a gender and 
human rights approach  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 3 at national level, 5 at territorial level and 10 at 
community level  
 
 
Project offices 
 
 
Baseline: 17 
Target: 56  
 
  
 
 
 
Indicator 4.1.2 Number of alternative public and care 
services established/strengthened to help close gender gaps 
Baseline: 0 
Target: 5 
 
Indicator 2.3 Number of women, lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transsexual and intersex (LGBTI) people, people living with 
HIV and people with disabilities (disaggregated by sex and 
age) improving their living and working conditions by 
benefitting from care services  
Baseline: 0 
Target: 200 (women, LGBTI people and people with 
disabilities) 
 
16 
