United Nations 

Executive Board of the 
United Nations Development 
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the  
United Nations Office for 
Project Services 

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

Distr.: General 
5 April 2021 

Original: English 

Annual session 2021 
7–11 June 2021, New York 
Item 8 of the provisional agenda 
Country programmes and related matters 

  Country programme document for Argentina 

(2021-2025) 

Contents 

Chapter  

I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework ................  

II.  Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….… 
III.  Programme and risk management ....................................................................................  
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….…………………… 

Annex 

Results and resources framework for Argentina (2021-2025) 

Page 

2 

3 

6 

7 

8 

21-04544X (E)    130421 
*2104544* 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

I.  UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 

Framework 

1.  Argentina  scores  very  highly  on  the  Human  Development  Index,  ranked  46  of  189 
countries in 2020, and is classified by the World Bank as an upper-middle-income country, 
with  a  gross  national  income  per  capita  of  $10,006  in  2019.  Nonetheless,  there  is  great 
heterogeneity between regions regarding indicators for productivity, well-being and social 
development.1  Alongside  territorial  inequalities,  there  are  inequalities  among  population 
groups,  where  socioeconomic  inequities  intertwine  with  gender,  ethnic,  racial  and 
generational inequalities, hindering the possibilities to eradicate poverty, ensure sustainable 
development and guarantee human rights.2 

2.  The country faces high macroeconomic volatility, aggravated by the coronavirus disease 
(COVID-19) pandemic which generated an estimated 19.1 per cent drop in gross domestic 
product  in  the  second  quarter  of  2020,  while  unemployment  escalated  by  9.2  percentage 
points  over  the  same  period.  This  resulted  in  higher  rates  of  poverty  (40.9  per  cent)  and 
extreme poverty (10.5 per cent) during the first half of 2021, within a context of  inflation 
rates over and above the regional mean (37.5 per cent in 2016, 47.6 per cent in 2018 and 53.8 
per  cent  in  2019).3  There  is  also  significant  income  inequality:  the  top  10  per  cent  of  the 
Argentine population earns 25 times more than the most disadvantaged segment, taking into 
consideration per capita family income. Over half  (56.3 per cent) of  children from 0 to14 
years old are poor. The most vulnerable are children and adolescents; lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transsexual,  intersex  and  other  persons  (LGBTI+);  migrants  and  refugees;  indigenous 
peoples;  Afro-descendants;  persons  with  disabilities;  and  those  deprived  of  their  liberty. 
Within these groups, women face greater obstacles and more inequality than men. 

3.  The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  had  an  impact  on  health  and  the  economy,  mainly 
affecting employment, income and the living conditions of the most vulnerable social sectors 
(women, LGBTI+ persons, informal male and female workers and the self-employed). Data 
for  the  second  quarter  of  2020  show  an  increase  in  the  Gini  index  compared  to  the  same 
period in 2019, scaling up to 0.451 from 0.447. 

4.  Although Argentina has doubled its protected areas in the last few years, it is not exempt 
from hazards and pressures brought about by the current development model, resulting in the 
disturbance, fragmentation and degradation of ecosystems such as desertification, expansion 
of extractive activities, illegal trade of flora and fauna, invasion of alien species, the energy 
matrix profile, pollution and climate change.  

5.  Concerning institutional capacity, there are differences between jurisdictions and within 
public  sector  institutions  on  efficiency,  transparency  and  accountability;  administration; 
planning, monitoring and evaluation process upgrades; and coordination among the different 
state levels to address and contribute to eliminating structural inequalities. There is a need to 
strengthen  strategies  to  access  information  across  the  country  and  ensure  effective 
mechanisms for citizen participation. 

6.  The  Gender  Inequality  Index  for  Argentina  is  0.354,  placing  it  77  of  162  countries. 
Within this context of social vulnerability and economic contraction, it is even more critical 
to  close  the  gender  gap.  To  do  so,  the  gender  equality  perspective  must  be  further 
mainstreamed in all actions and the effective representation of women in decision-making 
must be guaranteed. 

7.  UNDP Argentina is recognized by  all parties as a strategic partner contributing to the 
implementation  of  the  2030 Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development.  The 2019  independent 
country  programme  evaluation  underscores  that  UNDP  has  helped  to  improve  provincial 

1 Argentina Human Development Report, 2017. 
2  Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2019. 
3 National Institute of Statistics and Censuses, 2020. 

2/14 

21-04544 

 
 
 
 
 
\ 

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

health-care services by providing support to the streamlining of the health system and the 
interconnection  of  the  health-care  network.  UNDP  supported  the  implementation  of  the 
National Food Security Plan through community organizations. It contributed significantly 
to  entrepreneurship  and  production  capacities,  with  positive  outcomes  at  the  local  level. 
to  promote  information  and  communication 
UNDP  supported  government  efforts 
technologies  for  open  government  initiatives,  improving  public  service  transparency  and 
efficiency  and  facilitating  citizen  participation.  UNDP  has  promoted  access  to  justice, 
improving the justice system’s coverage and quality, particularly for disadvantaged groups 
including victims of gender-based violence. It also promoted women’s political participation 
and economic empowerment, and the reduction of gender-based violence. UNDP improved 
institutional capacities in environmental governance and management, assisting the Ministry 
of  Security  in  developing  a  national  comprehensive  risk  management  and  civil  protection 
system, and also the Argentine Ministry for the Environment and Sustainable Development 
in generating environmental data using upgraded information technology systems.  

8.  UNDP  will  support  institutional  reforms;  leverage  implementation  of  the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  and  environmental  strategies  at  the  subnational  level;  explore 
opportunities  to  strategically  expand  collaborative  partnerships  at  the  provincial  level, 
particularly in the north; continue to make progress in mainstreaming the gender perspective 
and rights-based approach in all sectors; emphasize programme  integration, synergies and 
knowledge  transfer;  and  reinforce  the  use  of  evaluations  to  learn  from  them  and  make 
evidence-based decisions.  

9.  UNDP  will  continue  partnering  with  the  Government  to  reduce  human  development 
inequalities over the life cycle by strengthening comprehensive strategies and policies within 
the Sustainable Development Goals. 

10.  Taking into consideration its comparative advantages, UNDP will continue working as 
a  platform  in  support  of  achieving  the  Goals  to:  (a)  establish  partnerships  by  convening 
multiple stakeholders to catalyse efforts and resources; (b) apply innovative approaches to 
identify  new  ways  of  addressing  challenges  (new  financial  and  legal  instruments  and 
approaches);  (c)  provide  comprehensive  responses  through  substantive  advice  including 
economic,  social  and  environmental  dimensions,  the  human  rights-based  approach  and 
gender and diversity from an intersectional approach; (d) provide support services to project 
execution  through  standardized,  systematic  and  proven  management  methods  that  ensure 
efficiency,  transparency  and  accountability;  (e) generate  knowledge  using  innovative  and 
empirical approaches; and (f) strengthen institutional capacities at all government levels.  

11.  The country programme  was developed  along with and is fully aligned to  the  United 
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF). Consultations were 
held with government counterparts including the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, International 
Trade and Worship; the Secretariat for Strategic Affairs of the Presidency; the National Social 
Policy Coordination Council; and the Secretariat of Human Rights of the Nation. Dialogue 
and validation processes were conducted with the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, International 
Trade  and  Worship;  of  Justice  and  Human  Rights;  of  the  Environment  and  Sustainable 
Development;  of  the  Interior;  of  Labor,  Employment  and  Social  Security;  of  Health;  of 
Education;  and  of  Women,  Gender  and  Diversity,  among  others.  To  include  the  federal 
perspective, a working session was held with the  Federal Sustainable Development Goals 
Network. Contributions from civil society included the Ombudsman's Office, unions, non-
governmental organizations that work on human rights issues, the private sector through the 
Global  Compact,  and  specific  population  groups  such  as  youth,  women,  migrants  and 
refugees, the LGBTI+ community and representatives of indigenous peoples. 

II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  

12.  The overarching vision of the country programme 2021-2025 is to reduce existing human 
development  inequalities  throughout  people’s  lives,  and  to  support  the  country’s 

21-04544 

3/14 

 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

socioeconomic  recovery  by  developing  comprehensive  policies  to  boost  growth  alongside 
social  inclusion  and  environmental  protection,  ensuring  an  integrated  social  protection 
system that will leave no one behind. UNDP will contribute to eliminating barriers to access 
to basic services, reducing territorial disparities, mainstreaming gender equality, improving 
public  sector  capacities,  preventing  environmental  degradation  and  recovering  affected 
environments, providing strong support to policy and programme implementation, capacity-
building  and  state  innovation  at  the  national  and  subnational  levels.  These  priorities  are 
reflected in the UNDP Strategic Plan, 2018-2021. 

13.  Inclusive  and  sustainable  development.  The  theory  of  change  hypothesizes  that  if 
productive initiatives at the local and regional levels foster sustainable entrepreneurship and 
innovation in an inclusive manner, and also consider the impacts on the country’s ecosystem, 
then  the  productive  matrix  will  be  diversified,  promoting  labour-market  recovery, 
development  of  sustainable  financing  and  fostering  social  inclusion,  emphasizing  the 
economic  participation  and  empowerment  of  women  and  the  integration  of  vulnerable 
populations.  The  assumptions  are  that  entrepreneurs,  local  companies  and  unemployed 
people will participate and be better prepared to increase productivity and to join the labour 
market; and that the private sector will participate and offer resources. UNDP will work in 
partnership  with  government  agencies,  trade  unions  and  the  International  Labour 
Organization (ILO). 

14.  Access to social services and social protection. The theory of change posits that: (a) if 
community  organizations  have  stronger  capacities  to  ensure  food  security  for  vulnerable 
groups  and  to  provide  community  services  such  as  health  care  and  professional  training, 
based  on  a  gender  and  diversity  approach  (applying  signature  solution  6);  and  (b)  if 
innovative strategies reduce inequalities in access to health services and address emerging 
diseases, then hunger and malnutrition will be reduced  and access to health for all will be 
guaranteed, with an emphasis on perinatal and maternal health, disabilities, prevention and 
treatment of chronic diseases, access to sexual and reproductive health care, and prevention 
of unintended adolescent pregnancy. The assumptions are that training will be effective and 
help community organizations to better deliver services, that the population will engage and 
go to health facilities and that public resources for health are available. UNDP will work in 
partnership  with  the  Ministry  of  Social  Development,  the  Ministry  of  Health,  the  United 
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the 
Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) and subnational governments. UNDP will support 
the creation of a comprehensive care system based on the co-responsibility principle, with 
the participation of civil society organizations (CSOs), the private sector and families. 

15.  Environment. The theory of change supposes that:  

(a)  If the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ensures the fulfilment of 
the  climate  action  agenda  (applying  signature  solution  4),  assuming  that  stakeholders  are 
responsive and provide resources and support, then the country will advance in achieving the 
commitments of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster 
Risk Reduction 2015-2030 and other international commitments, promoting intersectionality 
and mainstreaming gender equality, intergenerational equity and disaster risk management;  

(b)  If  the  rational  management  of  chemical  substances,  products  and  waste  is  improved, 
assuming that proposals and activities are developed and support continues at the national 
and subnational levels, then human health and the environment will be protected; 

(c)  If  mechanisms  are  implemented for  the  protection  and  sustainable  use  of  biodiversity, 
assuming that the participation of women, local farmers and the indigenous peoples in the 
country is assured, then the environment, human health and livelihoods will be protected at 
the national and subnational levels and between sectors. UNDP will work in partnership with 
the Ministry of Environment and  the  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)  in 
supporting the country’s fulfilment of international conventions. 

4/14 

21-04544 

 
 
 
 
\ 

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

16.  Democratic  governance.  The  hypothesis  is  that:  (a)  if  institutional  innovation  and 
streamlining of programmes are based on standards of transparency and accountability and 
include accessible digital interventions (applying signature solution 2 to strengthen effective, 
accountable  and  inclusive  governance),  and  assuming  that  institutional  engagement  and 
resources are available, then the effectiveness of public policies will be enhanced to foster 
the  provision  of  public  services  and  diminish  the  digital  gap  from  a  differential  and 
intersectional  approach;  and  (b)  if  effective  participatory  institutional  mechanisms  are 
developed to access information and mainstream human rights, assuming the programmers’ 
engagement  of  intersectoral  partners  at  all  levels  of  government,  the  participation  of  civil 
society  and  the  required  funds,  then  equal  access  to  justice  for  all  will  be  enhanced, 
reinforcing  the  rule  of  law  and  human  safety.  UNDP  will  work  in  partnership  with  the 
Ministry of Justice and Human Rights and CSOs.   

17.  UNDP will mainstream the gender equality signature solution in all actions.  Considering 
challenges identified in the previous programmatic cycle, UNDP, in partnership with UN-
Women, the European Union and CSOs, will emphasize the importance of allocating specific 
resources to promote gender equality and the empowerment of women and LGBTI+ persons 
and actions to eradicate gender-based violence. 

18.  Through its Sustainable Development Goal Accelerator Lab, UNDP will establish new 
approaches (sense-making, solutions mapping, collective intelligence, designing and testing), 
adjusting  to  the  complexity  of  the  current  development  challenges  and  the  design  of 
innovative  evidence-based  instruments.  Partnerships  will  be  created  and  reinforced  as  a 
platform  for  catalysing  solutions  and  the  exchange  of  knowledge,  resources  and  solutions 
among government, civil society, academia and the private sector. 

19.  UNDP  will  strengthen  its  partnership  strategy  with  stakeholders  involved  in 
multisectoral  approaches.  This  will  allow  collaboration  to  catalyse  efforts  and  resources. 
UNDP  will  continue  strengthening  its  partnership  with  the  Foreign  Coordination  and 
Planning  Secretariat  as  the  public  coordinating  agency  and  will  continue  reinforcing 
relationships with academia, trade unions, think tanks, CSOs and the private sector. The main 
donors in this programme cycle will be the national and subnational governments and vertical 
funds such as the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the Green Climate Fund.  

20.  UNDP  will  extend  its  integrator  role,  seeking  synergies  with  other  United  Nations 
agencies,  different  government  sectors  and  other  stakeholders,  to  provide  comprehensive 
solutions  to  complex  development  issues  within  the  framework  of  the  2030  Agenda  for 
Sustainable Development. The office will implement joint initiatives (Spotlight, Joint SDG 
Fund, etc.) and will coordinate actions with United Nations agencies in development projects, 
mainly in:  

(a)  Preventing  unintended  adolescent  pregnancy  (UNFPA,  United  Nations  Children’s 

Fund (UNICEF));  

(b)  Eliminating  violence  against  women  and  girls  and  femicide  (UN-Women),  ILO, 

UNFPA, UNICEF);  

(c) Mainstreaming human rights, gender equality and diversity approaches (UN-Women, 

UNFPA, UNICEF);  

(d)  Preventing  discrimination  and  violence  against  people  with  HIV  (Joint  United 
Nations  Programme  on  HIV/AIDS,  Pan  American  Health  Organization/World  Health 
Organization (PAHO/WHO), UNICEF);  

(e)  Promoting  an  inclusive  green  economy  through  green  job  creation  (ILO,  UNEP, 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Institute for Training 
and Research);  

(f) Strengthening childcare services (UNICEF, ECLAC, ILO);  

21-04544 

5/14 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

(g) Climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation  (UNEP,  Food  and  Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations), sustainable consumption and production (UNEP), the 
International Humanitarian Network) and wetlands regulatory framework (all programmes, 
funds and agencies of the United Nations system in Argentina);  

(h) The local Global Compact network in Argentina (ILO, ECLAC);  

(i)  Integrity,  sustainability  and  transparency  (UNEP  Finance  Initiative,  Office  of  the 

United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR));  

(j) Strengthenig  capacities  to  prevent  trafficking  in  persons  (ILO,  International 

Organization for Migration);  

(k) Human safety and effective participation (PAHO/WHO, OHCHR, ILO);  

(l) Promoting human rights standards (United Nations system).  

III.  Programme and risk management  

21.  This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountability of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
the organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework. 

22.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced  by direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a  coordinated fashion 
with  other  United  Nations  agencies  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and 
classifications  for  programme  and  development  effectiveness  will  be  charged  to  the 
concerned projects. 

23.  The Foreign Coordination and Planning Secretariat  will be the national counterpart in 
charge of coordination, and other national and subnational authorities will be implementing 
partners. Programme execution will be coordinated with the United Nations system and joint 
programmes will be promoted.    

24.  The  programme  will  be  executed  according  to  a  results-based  management  model  to 
progressively  increase  the  level  of  efficacy  and  efficiency  and  ensure  its  contribution  to 
national priorities and the 2030 Agenda. The partnership and resource mobilization strategy 
will focus on funding opportunities for innovative solutions to address complex development 
challenges.  UNDP  will  collaborate  with  the  Government  to  facilitate  South-South  and 
triangular  cooperation,  identifying  and  facilitating  the  systematic  exchange  of  solutions, 
experiences, innovation and good practices among actors from countries of the Global South, 
such  as  public  institutions,  academia,  civil  society,  intergovernmental,  subregional  and 
binational  mechanisms.  UNDP  will  support  the  country  regarding  its  positioning  in 
multilateral bodies and forums. 

25.  The creation and enhancement of partnerships will be promoted with other multilateral 
development agencies, the private sector and national institutions. 

26.  The risk that could affect the scope of the country programme targets is greater budgetary 
and  financial  constraints  within  an  economic  slowdown,  aggravated  by  the  impact  of 
COVID-19. 

27.  Within  the  post-pandemic  social  and  economic  recovery  plan  outlined  by  the  United 
Nations  system,  UNDP  will  follow  up  on  the  socioeconomic  situation,  providing  an 
integrated view to facilitate monitoring of the pandemic’s impact as well as technical inputs 
for designing and implementing response and recovery measures. 

6/14 

21-04544 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
\ 

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

28.  The  COVID-19  pandemic  aggravated  pre-existing  health  risks  and  could  put  the 
functioning of the general health system in crisis, making it difficult to treat other diseases. 
UNDP will support the ministries of health at national and subnational levels to provide equal 
access to health and a healthy environment, addressing emerging diseases, with an emphasis 
on perinatal and pregnant women’s health, disabilities, prevention and treatment of chronic 
non-communicable and communicable diseases (including HIV-specific services), access to 
sexual and reproductive health and prevention of unintended adolescent pregnancy. 

29.  To  ensure  the  expected outcomes,  and  in  agreement  with  the  UNDP  Programme  and 
Operations Policies and Procedures, the Foreign Coordination and Planning Secretariat and 
UNDP will periodically analyse and manage project risks. Risk monitoring will be used as 
an early warning, risk management and decision-making tool,  seeking greater consistency 
and  efficiency  of  cooperation  outcomes.  The  UNDP  social  and environmental  assessment 
procedure  will  be  used  and  support  will  be  rendered  to  the  key  stakeholder  response 
mechanism.  

30.  UNDP will participate in the United Nations system Communications Group to work on 
strategies and content related to joint programmes, special initiatives and mass campaigns. It 
will also participate in bilateral meetings and teams work for the same purpose. 

IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 

31.  Indicators defined in the results and resources framework will be used to follow up on 
progress towards the achievement of development outcomes. Every year, UNDP will update 
the database and will prepare a report to be shared with the Government during the annual 
programme  review.  The  evaluation  of  actions  carried  out  within  the  country  programme 
framework will be performed according to the UNDP evaluation guidelines. UNDP quality 
standards will be applied during the project life cycle. 

32.  UNDP will encourage  implementing  partners to use  specific, measurable, achievable, 
relevant and time-bound indicators, disaggregated by gender, age, geographic location and 
other relevant variables, taking into account specific information on the most disadvantaged 
population. 

33.  The  gender  marker  will  continue  to  be  a  key  instrument  for  planning,  oversight  and 
evaluation to determine whether programme and project design meets the specific needs of 
women and ensure gender equality mainstreaming. 

34.  Information to prepare reports will be taken from different sources: the National Institute 
of  Statistics  and  Censuses,  ministerial  databases  and  those  of  other  relevant  agencies, 
information generated by projects and international statistics. Partnerships will be enhanced 
with academic and public institutions and CSOs to help monitor development  outputs and 
outcomes in a joint effort of the United Nations system. 

35.  Programme and project evaluations will be carried out to identify lessons learned and 
generate  knowledge  in  support  of  evidence-based  decision-making.  UNDP  will  support 
national  capacity-building  to  generate  information,  evaluate  policies  and  contribute  to 
exploring innovative approaches for public policy evaluation.  

36.  Evaluations will appraise the UNDP contribution to national outcomes and priorities and 
determine  achievements.  Recommendations  will  be  used  as  input  for  designing  new 
initiatives, making programme adjustments to ongoing activities, and incorporating lessons 
learned and good practices.  

37.  UNDP will consolidate comprehensive planning, monitoring, and evaluation to reinforce 
knowledge management and accountability, including mechanisms to identify contributions 
and select replicable innovative initiatives.  

21-04544 

7/14 

 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

Annex. Results and resources framework for Argentina (2021-2025) 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable Development Goals 5, 8  

UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2025, the population will have benefited from an environmental and economically sustainable and socially inclusive production model, promoting 
triple-impact investments, exports and diversification, fostering the science-technology and industry interlinkage and mainstreaming the person-centred future of work and gender approaches so as to 
boost an increase in productivity and job creation. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions. 

DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, 
AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 

Ministry 
reports. Annual.  

of 

Labour 

Ministry  of  Environment 
and Gender reports. 
Annual. 

COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S) 

Existence of an improved enabling 
environment 
to  expand  decent 
work  and  livelihoods:  (a)  policy, 
legal,  regulatory  and  institutional 
frameworks;  (b)  direct  creation  of 
employment 
to 
and 
livelihoods in the (b1) public sector 
and  (b2)  private  sector.  (Strategic 
Plan (SP) 1.1.2.3). 

support 

Baseline 2020: yes (a) 
Target 2025: yes (b1); (b2) 

Number  of  people 
accessing 
financial  and  non-financial  assets, 
disaggregated by target groups:  
(a) poor; (b) women. (SP 1.1.2.2). 

Baseline  2020:  (a)  20,000;  (b)  0. 
Target 2025: (a) 30,000); (b) 100  

INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS  

MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 

ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($) 

Regular  
$260,000  

Other  
$104,000,000 

National  Ministries  of  Productive 
Development; 
Labour, 
Employment  and  Social  Security; 
Women,  Gender  and  Diversity; 
Social  Development;  Economy; 
Sustainable 
Environment 
and 
Development; 
and 
Technology.  
Provincial  governments.  San  Juan 
Investment Agency.  
Private Sector.  
Universities and study centres.  

Science 

Output  1.1  Development  and  diversification  of  sustainable  and 
productive initiatives at the local and regional levels implemented from a 
gender  perspective  to  foster  sustainable  entrepreneurship,  triple-impact 
investments  and  innovation,  and  driving  the  green  and  social economy 
and sustainable financing. 

Indicator 1.1.1 Number of entrepreneurs and micro, small and medium-
sized  enterprises  strengthened  through  initiatives  promoting  innovation 
and sustainability. Baseline 2019: 9,402. Target 2025: 99,625. Source: 
Ministry of Productive Development. 

Indicator  1.1.2  Number  of  strategies  implemented  that  envisage  a 
reduction in gender gaps and a differential approach.   
Baseline 2020: 0. Target 2025: 3. Source: Projects Reports. 

Output  1.2  Promotion  of  decent  work  and  livelihoods  restoration  by 
improving  employment  opportunities  and  capabilities,  with  a  special 
emphasis on the participation and economic empowerment of women and 
vulnerable populations. 

Indicator  1.2.1  Number  of  strategies  to  promote  decent  work, 
incentivizing the participation of youth in the labour force, disaggregated 
by those that take into account gender gap narrowing and the differential 
approach.  
Baseline 2019: 4. Target 2025: 4.  Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator 1.2.1 Number of youths participating in decent work promotion 
and recovery strategies, disaggregated by gender.  
Baseline  2019:  290,385.  Target  2025:  1,165,385.  Source:  Projects 
Reports. 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable Development Goals 2, 3, 5  

UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2025, the country will have improved regulatory, policy and fiscal frameworks that will be gender and rights-sensitive to ensure an inclusive, 
quality supply of basic social services in health, food security, education, care, protection, housing and justice. These frameworks will respect the environment and all cultural dimensions and pay 
special attention to the most disadvantaged territories and populations. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  1 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions. 

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

National  Ministries  of  Social 
Development;  Health;  Education; 
Women,  Gender  and  Diversity. 
National 
Policy 
Social 
Coordination Council.  
Inter-Ministerial  Roundtable  on 
Care Policies.  
Argentine National Council against 
Hunger.  
National 
Administrator 
Provincial governments.  
CSOs,  Universities  and 
centres. 

Security 

Social 

study 

Number  of  people  accessing  basic 
services,  disaggregated  by  target 
groups: (a) Poor, (b) Women,  
(c) People with disabilities,  
(d) Youth. (SP 1.1.2.1) 

Baseline 2020: (a) 16,500.000;  
(b) 7,640,000; (c) 1,000,000;  
(d) 2,850,000  
Target 2025: (a) 18,000,000;  
(b) 11,000,000; (c) 1,500,000;  
(d) 4,850,000.  

Proportion  of 
total  government 
spending  on  essential  services 
social 
(education,  health  and 
protection). (SP 1.2) 

Baseline  2020:  62.5%  (estimate). 
Target 2025: 66%  

Number of people who have access 
to  HIV  treatment-related  services, 
disaggregated  by  gender 
(SP 
1.2.1.3). 

Baseline 2020: 93,800 
Target 2025: 139,000  

Ministries  of  Labour, 
Health 
Social 
and 
Development. 
Annual.  

Output 2.1 Capacities developed in community organizations to ensure 
food security for the vulnerable population through regular access to safe, 
nutritious  and  sufficient  food  and  other  community  and  productive 
services associated with the gender and diversity approach. 

Indicator  2.1.1.  Number  of  community  organizations  within  the 
programme “Abordaje Comunitario del Plan Nacional Argentina Contra 
el  Hambre”  that  incorporate  comprehensive  quality  services  (besides 
food).   
Baseline 2020: 790. Target 2025: 900. Source: Projects Reports. 

Budget  Office  of 
National 
Annual.  

the 
Congress. 

Indicator  2.1.2  Number  of  persons  accessing  food  security  services, 
disaggregated by gender.   
Baseline  2020:  280,000.  Target  2025:  376.313.  Source:  Ministry  of 
Social Development. 

Ministry of Health. 
Annual. 

Indicator  2.1.3  Extent  to  which  the  strategies  for  strengthening 
community organizations include activities aimed at gender equality, the 
empowerment of women, and the promotion of LGBTI+ rights (1. Not 
included, 2. Only slightly included 3. Partially included, 4. Included to a 
great extent).  
Baseline 2020: 2. Target 2025: 4. Source: Project Reports. 

Output 2.2 The Ministries of Health at national and subnational level can 
provide  equal  access  to  health  and  a  healthy  environment,  addressing 
emerging diseases, with an emphasis on perinatal and pregnant women’s 
treatment  of  chronic  non-
health,  disabilities,  prevention  and 
communicable  and  communicable  diseases  (including  HIV-specific 
services),  access  to  sexual  and  reproductive  health  and  prevention  of 
unintended adolescent pregnancy. 

Indicator  2.2.1  Proportion  of  the  eligible  population  that  receives 
Effective Basic Coverage  
Baseline 2019: 26,70%. Target 2025: 41%. Source: Ministry of Health. 

Indicator 2.2.2 Proportion of the eligible population registered and served 
by a health institution.  
Baseline to be defined. Target 2025: 21%. Source: Ministry of Health. 

Regular  
$260,000 

Other 
$578,750,000 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

Indicator 2.2.3 Number of provinces implementing strategies to reinforce 
access to health for the vulnerable groups.   
Baseline 2020: 1. Target 2025: 4 Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator 2.2.4 Number of unintended pregnancies prevented in 10 to 19-
year-old girls and young women in the 12 provinces with the highest rates 
of unintended adolescent pregnancy.  
Baseline  2019:  32,574.  Target  2023:  289,242.  Source:  Ministry  of 
Health. 

Indicator 2.2.5 Number of implemented strategies that envisage gender 
gap narrowing and a differential approach.  
Baseline 2019: 1. Target 2025: 4 Source: Projects Reports. 

life-cycle  care  system  with  co-responsibility 

Output  2.3  Families  and  public  services  are  strengthened  to  create  a 
comprehensive 
in 
partnerships with the private sector and CSOs 
Indicator 2.3.1. Number of supported strategies and initiatives to promote 
the  creation  of  a  comprehensive  care  system  with  co-responsibility, 
ensuring a differential approach and women’s empowerment.   
Baseline 2020: 2. Target 2025: 4 Source: Projects Reports and Ministry 
of Social Development. 

Indicator  2.3.2  Number  of  families  with  strengthened  capacities  and 
supported  in  their  parenting  practices  from  a  gender  perspective, 
disaggregated by heads of household (male or female).  
Baseline 2019: 55,322. Target: to be defined. Source: Ministry of Social 
Development. 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable Development Goals 7, 13, 15  

UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: By 2025, the population will have benefited from the country’s progress in implementing its environmental regulatory frameworks, based on policy 
strengthening for climate action, prevention, reduction and control of pollution, waste management, disaster risk management, energy and sustainable development and sustainable production and 
consumption. Nature-based and evidence-based solutions will be promoted and human rights, intersectoral and gender approaches will be mainstreamed. 

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  3 – Strengthen resilience to shocks and crises. 

a 

sustainable 

Natural resources that are managed 
under 
use, 
conservation,  access  and  benefit-
sharing  regime:  (a)  Area  under 
sustainable 
forest  management 
(hectares),  (b)  Biodiversity  (using 
appropriate  units  of  measure),  (c) 
Amount  of  chemicals  reduced  or 
(SP 
disposed 
1.4.1.2). 

(metric 

tons). 

Baseline 2020: (a) 7,600,000;  

10 

Ministry of Environment. 
Annual. 

Output 3.1 The Ministry of Environment can implement and  follow up 
the climate  action  agenda,  contributing  to  the  achievement of the  Paris 
Agreement, the Sendai Framework, and the commitments undertaken at 
the international  level, promoting  intersectionality,  gender  equality  and 
intergenerational equity. 

Indicator  3.1.1  Degree  of  progress 
in  fulfilling  climate  action 
commitments within the Paris Agreement (1. Draft Long-Term Strategy 
document  formulated;  2.  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (NDC) 
revised; 3. Long-Term Strategy agreed upon by consensus; 4. Third NDC 
prepared).  

Regular  
$260,000 

Other 
$39,651,000 

National Ministries of Environment 
and  Sustainable  Development; 
Health;  Agriculture,  Livestock  and 
Affairs, 
Foreign 
Fisheries; 
International  Trade,  and  Worship; 
Industry;  Women,  Gender  and 
Diversity; Science and Technology; 
National  Climate  Change  Cabinet. 
the 
Federal 
Environment. 
 Governments  of  the  provinces  of 
Mendoza,  Jujuy  &  Buenos  Aires; 

Council 

of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
local 

other 
government 
environmental  agencies.  CSOs; 
Universities;  
National Council for Scientific and 
Technical  Research  of  Argentina; 
National  Institute  of  Agricultural 
Technology;  National  Institute  of 
Industrial Technology (INTI); GEF; 
of  Latin 
Development  Bank 
for 
America;  Federal  Ministry 
Economic 
and 
Development; the private sector. 

Cooperation 

(b) 50.000;  (c) 1,500. 
Target 2025: (a) 8,150,000;  
(b) 150,000; (c) 1,700.  

Baseline  2016:  revised  NDCs.  Target  2025:  4.  Source:  Ministry  of 
Environment  
Indicator 3.1.2 Number of Climate Change response plans prepared by 
jurisdiction, disaggregated by those that include the gender approach.  
Baseline 2020: 0. Target 2025: 24 (12). Source: Ministry of Environment  

Indicator 3.1.3 National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation Plan 
designed  and  agreed  upon  by  consensus,  mainstreaming  a  gender 
approach.   
Baseline 2020: No. Target 2025: Yes. Source: Ministry of Environment. 

Output 3.2 Rational management of chemical substances and products, 
as  well  as  waste  management,  implemented  at  the  national  and 
subnational levels to protect human health and the environment, taking 
into account the gender differences and contributing to compliance with 
international conventions. 

Indicator  3.2.1  Number of eliminated  tons of  Polychlorinated  biphenyl 
(PCB), pesticides and mercury-containing waste.  
Baseline 2020: 8,000. Target 2025: 13,470 Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator 3.2.2 Number of policies, programmes, strategies, regulations 
and/or  standards  formulated  at  the  national  level  for  strengthening 
chemical  substance  and  product  as  well  as  waste  management, 
disaggregated  by  those  that  include  the  gender  perspective  and  a 
differential approach.  
Baseline 2020: 20 Target 2025: 28 (14). Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator  3.2.3  Number  of  persons  participating  in  the  Gender  Action 
Plan  and  Communication  Strategy  Activities  for  rationally  managing 
chemical substances and products, disaggregated by gender.  
Baseline 2020: 1,500 (900 women/600 men). Target 2024: 3,500 (2,100 
W/1,400 M). Source: Ministry of Environment  

Output 3.3 National and subnational public capacities for protection and 
sustainable  use  of  biodiversity  fostered  to  protect  the  environment  and 
ensure human health and livelihoods, in an intersectoral manner, and with 
the  participation  of  women,  local  farmers  (male  and  female),  and  the 
indigenous  peoples  in  the  country,  in  compliance  with  international 
conventions. 

Indicator  3.3.1  Number  of  hectares  under  sustainable  management 
practice plans targeted to biodiversity and native forests.  
Baseline 2020: 14,598,704. Target 2025: 17,000,000. Source: Ministry 
of Environment and Sustainable Development. 

Indicator 3.3.2 Number of subnational partnerships for dialogue purposes 
to mainstream biodiversity in sector-based programming, disaggregated 

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

by  those  that  include  the  gender  approach,  or  have  a  specific  budget 
appropriation.   
Baseline: 0. Target 2024: 50. Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator  3.3.3  Number  of  persons  with  improved  livelihoods  by 
managing  environmentally  friendly  natural  resources  and  sustainable 
production, disaggregated by gender and ethnicity.   
Baseline 2020: 0. Target 2024: 5,000. Source: Ministry of Environment. 

Indicator  3.3.4  Number  of  Nagoya  Protocol  certificates  of  compliance 
issued  by  the  country  and  published  in  the  Access  to  Benefit-Sharing 
clearing house, disaggregated by commercial and non-commercial use.   
Baseline  2020:  1  commercial.  Target  2024:  4  commercial  and  8  non-
commercial. Source: Projects Reports. 

NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable Development Goals 5, 16  

UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #4: By 2025, the country will have strengthened the promotion, protection, and respect for the enjoyment of human rights-based on gender equality and 
social and geographical equity principles for all, and will have strengthened state institutions at the national and subnational levels so as to achieve efficiency and efficacy in public management and 
the promotion of policies for access to justice and citizen security.  It will have also ensured access to public information, knowledge management, and effective, inclusive participation.  

RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:  2 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development. 

of 

Number 
institutions  with 
to 
effective  measures  adopted 
mitigate  and  remedy  corruption 
risks 
by 
disaggregated 
governmental level and branch. 

Baseline 2020: 1 
Target 2025: 5 

Number of institutions that 
improve public services through 
ICT, disaggregated by 
governmental level, branch and 
type of end user 

Baseline 2020: 5 
Target 2025: 15 

has 

strengthened 
Country 
capacities 
for  governance  and 
oversight of rule of law institutions 
(SP 2.2.3.3) 

Baseline 2020: yes.  
Target 2025: yes.  

on 

National 
Voluntary 
2030 
Reports 
of 
Agenda.  Chief 
Cabinet 
Ministry, 
National  Ministries  of 
Justice 
and  Human 
Rights; Foreign Affairs, 
International  Trade  and 
Worship; 
Women, 
Gender  and  Diversity. 
Penitentiary  Attorney-
General’s  Office;  Anti-
corruption 
Office.  
Banco  de  la  Nación 
Argentina. 
Governments  of 
the 
Provinces  of  Cordoba, 
Buenos  Aires,  Chaco, 
Buenos  Aires  City. 
Cordoba  Municipality. 
Federal Board of Courts 
of  Justice.  Río  Negro. 
Legislatures 
Annual. 

Output 4.1 Institutional innovation promoted at all levels of government 
based on transparency and accountability standards, including accessible 
digital interventions that reduce the digital divide, applying a differential 
and intersectional approach. 

Indicator 4.1.1 Number of innovation strategies and methodologies at the 
national and subnational levels applied to improve management efficacy, 
efficiency and transparency.   
Baseline 2020: 16. Target 2025: 30. Source: Ministries at national and 
subnational level. 

Indicator 4.1.2 Degree of improvement in public institutions’ capacity by 
introducing  effective,  efficient,  and  transparent  procedures  (1.  No 
improvement,  2.  Only  slightly  improved,  3.  Partially  improved,  4. 
Improved to a great extent). 
Baseline 2020: 2. Target 2025: 4. Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator  4.1.3  Number  of  users  accessing  public  digital  services, 
disaggregated  by  gender,  age,  geographic  location,  persons  with 
disabilities, ethnicity.  
Baseline  2020:100,000.  Target  2025:  161,051.  Source:  Ministries  at 
national and subnational level 
Indicator 4.1.4 Number of strategies implemented and considering gender 
gap narrowing and the differential approach.   
Baseline 2020: 1. Target 2025:5. Source: Projects Reports. 

Regular  
$260,000 

Other 
$109,800,000 

Chief of Cabinet Ministry. National 
Ministries  of  Justice  and  Human 
Rights; 
Affairs, 
Foreign 
International  Trade  and  Worship; 
Women,  Gender  and  Diversity. 
Penitentiary 
Attorney-General’s 
Office;  Anti-corruption  Office.  
National  Agency  for  Controlled 
Materials;  Banco  de  la  Nación 
Argentina. 
Governments  of  the  Provinces  of 
Cordoba,  Buenos  Aires,  Chaco, 
Buenos  Aires  City.  Cordoba 
Municipality.  Local  Governments. 
Federal 
Magistrates’  Council. 
Justice. 
Board  of  Courts  of 
Prosecutor’s 
of 
Office 
Administrative  Investigations  Río 
Negro. Legislatures. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number  of  key  measures  in  place 
that  set  and  monitor  progress 
towards 
for 
women's  rights  in  the:  (a)  Public 
sector,  (b)  Private  sector,  (c)  Not-
for-profit sector (SP 1.6.1.1) 

numeric 

targets 

Baseline 2020: 0 
Target 2025: 5 

Number of  partnerships  across  the 
whole-of-society raising awareness 
of 
to 
discriminations. 

eliminate 

forms 

all 

Baseline 2020: 0 
Target 2025: 5 

Output 4.2 Human rights-based approach and equal access to justice for 
all  and  for  human  security  are  strengthened  with  an  intercultural  and 
gender perspective.  

DP/DCP/ARG/4 

innovation 

institutional 

Indicator  4.2.1  Number  of 
strategies, 
methodologies  and  interventions  developed  to  design  and  implement 
public  policies  on  culture,  the  open  parliament,  elections,  justice  and 
inclusion,  safety,  violence  and  anti-corruption  at  the  national  and 
subnational levels.  
Baseline  2020:10.  Target  2025:20.    Source:  Ministries  at  national  and 
subnational level 

Indicator 4.2.2 Degree of technical support provide to the government at 
the  national  and  subnational  levels  to  implement  regulations  (1.  No 
technical  assistance;  2.  Partial  technical  assistance;  3  Substantial 
technical assistance).  
Baseline 2020: 2. Target 2025: 3. Source: Projects Reports. 

Indicator  4.2.3  Number  of  persons  accessing  justice  services  with  a 
gender  and  intercultural  perspective,  disaggregated  by  gender,  age  and 
jurisdiction.  
Baseline  2020:  250,000.  Target  2025:  400,000.  Source:  Ministry  of 
Justice and Human Rights 
Indicator 4.2.4 Number of initiatives designed to promote human rights, 
gender  equality,  reduce  gender-based  violence  and  sexual  diversity 
approaches.   
Baseline 2020: 4. Target 2025: 11. Source: Projects Reports. 

Output  4.3:  Intersectoral  partnerships  at  all  levels  of  government 
strengthened to promote effective participation and access to information 
for  inclusive  decision-making,  and  gender  equality  mainstreaming 
fostered. 

Indicator 4.3.1 Number of public institutions that facilitate platforms and 
instruments  to  promote  participation  at  the  national  and  subnational 
levels.   
Baseline  2020:  5.  Target  2025:  10.  Source:  Ministries  at  national  and 
subnational level 

Indicator 4.3.2 Number of initiatives that contribute to reducing violence 
in all its forms, promoting dialogue, active transparency, accountability 
and open government, implemented by the government at the national and 
subnational levels.  
Baseline 2020: 2. Target 2025: 7. Source: Ministry of Women, Gender 
and Diversity 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/ARG/4 

Indicator  4.3.3  Number  of  strategies  implemented  that  envisage 
narrowing the gender gap and providing gender-specific approaches.   
Baseline 2020:0. Target 2025:5. Source: Projects Reports. 

14 

 
 
 
