File Name: EGY-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Egypt
Country Code: EGY
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August–1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations 
Population Fund and the United 
Nations Office for Project Services
Distr.: General
27 June 2022
Original: English
2210280X (E) 210722
Second regular session 2022
29 August–1 September 2022, New York
Item 3 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Egypt (2023–2027)
Contents
Chapter Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................ 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 8
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 9
Annex
Results and resources framework for Egypt (2023–2027).......................................................... 10I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework
1. Egypt is a middle-income country whose large population (102.3 million) is growing at 2.4 
per cent per annum.
1 Since 2016, reforms have resulted in increased monetary and fiscal 
discipline, widened social protection, macroeconomic stability, sustained economic growth
averaging 4.4 per cent in the last five years, lower unemployment and a decrease in the rate of 
extreme poverty from 6.2 per cent2to 4.5 per cent.
3 These policies helped Egypt to withstand 
the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The subsequent National 
Structural Reform Programme, launched in 2021, focuses on enhancing productivity in the 
agricultural, manufacturing and information technology sectors. The country’s Human 
Development Index value has increased 29 per cent since 1990, reaching 0.707 in 2019, placing 
Egypt in the high human development category.4 Key challenges remain in achieving the 
Sustainable Development Goals, with Goals 1, 5, 8 and 16 requiring accelerated progress.
5
2. The Common Country Analysis identifies several interlinked challenges facing the United 
Nations system in Egypt. Alleviating poverty and vulnerability will remain a priority, as the 
COVID-19 pandemic increased the poverty rate from 29.7 per cent in 2019-2020 to an 
estimated 31.4 per cent by October 2020, with 27 per cent of Egyptians remaining vulnerable 
to poverty. Global supply chain disruptions and high food prices put added pressure on the 
fragile balance of payments, Egyptian currency and price stability. Constrained fiscal space 
limits public investments in social services. Addressing the challenge of multidimensional 
poverty will require a holistic approach to improving in-demand education/skills; a 
strengthened enabling environment for the private sector and entrepreneurship; and better 
designed and better targeted social protection/assistance. Gender, rural-urban and other 
inequalities need to be addressed by improving women’s economic empowerment and 
protection from violence, expanding access to services in rural areas or for persons with 
disabilities and expanding employment opportunities for youth. Women’s empowerment can 
strongly benefit the economy and investment in youth will yield long-lasting demographic 
dividends. While Egypt has relatively low prevalence of HIV and tuberculosis, it needs to 
continue efforts at prevention and treatment to end these epidemics by 2030. 
3. The competitiveness, scalability, employment multiplicator potential and resilience of 
micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) are recognized as key entry points for the 
overall growth of productivity. While the digital transformation of society has accelerated 
during the pandemic, it must be managed carefully to avoid exacerbating inequalities and 
exclusion. Egyptian governance systems continue to undergo sector-wide transformations and 
will need to improve policy coordination, monitoring and evaluation; accelerate the 
empowerment of local and governorate-level decision-making; and upgrade systems supporting 
the provision of public services.
6
4. To guide the country in pursuing the Sustainable Development Goals, in 2016 the 
Government launched its national development strategy, Egypt Vision 2030, as the governing 
framework for all development programmes. More recently, the Government has committed in 
its action plan 2023-2027 to develop and invest in human capital; protect natural resources with 
a view towards security and sustainability; enhance productivity and employment; and improve 
the efficiency of government performance. These policy priorities have recently been 
elaborated in new strategies and laws, e.g., the National Climate Change Strategy 2050; Law 
152 of 2020 on the development of MSMEs; the Social Insurance and Pension Law (no. 148 of 
2019); and through the ongoing national project for the development of Egyptian villages (Haya 
Kareema) and the National Project for the Development of the Egyptian Family. 
1 Central Agency for Public Mobilization and Statistics (CAPMAS), live population meter, population as of 15 February 2022. 
2 www.un.org/development/desa/dspd/wp-content/uploads/sites/22/2021/02/Final-World-without-poverty-Egypt_31-january-2021.pdf
3 Gross domestic product figures from mped.gov.eg/GrossDomestic. Poverty figures from Household Income, Expenditure and Consumption 
Survey (CAPMAS).
4 UNDP Human Development Report 2020, Briefing Note – Egypt.5. In support of these national efforts, the United Nations Sustainable Development 
Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF) will address these interrelated challenges through five 
outcomes aimed at strengthening human capital (“people”); inclusive and sustainable economic 
development (“prosperity”); enhanced climate resilience and natural resource management 
(“planet”); transparent governance and rule of law (“governance”); and gender equality and 
women’s empowerment (“women”).
6. The integrated support of UNDP for implementation of the UNSDCF will include expertise 
to advance cross-sectoral policies and evidence-based programming, data analysis, 
development financing and demand-driven services to national partners and the United Nations 
country team. In line with the Strategic Plan, 2022-2025, UNDP will help drive change via 
three strategic enablers: (a) development financing, by leveraging comprehensive financing in 
pursuit of all Sustainable Development Goals; (b) digitalization, by providing thought 
leadership and practical innovations to build an inclusive, ethical and sustainable digital society 
and economy; and (c) integrated solutions and strategic innovations, by investing consistently 
into synergized interventions, multiplier platforms and portfolio approaches to trigger systemslevel changes. The country programme will also contribute to UNDP signature solutions 1, 2, 
3 and 6. 7
7. As highlighted by the independent country programme evaluation,
8 UNDP has been a 
reliable, efficient provider of development services. Its central value proposition lies in the areas 
of Sustainable Development Goal integration and financing; institutional and policy 
development support; MSME sector development; climate change, biodiversity and local 
development; and addressing governance and social issues that disproportionately affect 
women or persons in vulnerable situations. UNDP has also helped to leverage additional 
financing from development partners and vertical funds.
8. Building on this comparative advantage and the mobilization of UNDP global experience 
and policy networks, the country programme will focus on four strategic areas identified in the 
UNSDCF. Gender equality and the empowerment of women (UNSDCF outcome 5) will be 
mainstreamed across the four outcomes of the country programme (ensuring that at least 50 per 
cent of programme expenditure contributes directly to gender equality results, as measured by 
the UNDP gender marker).
9. Strengthened human capital (people). The UNDP contribution will reinforce the national 
commitment to social protection, focusing on effectiveness, sustainability and inclusivity
through strengthening social protection systems including casual workers, persons with 
disabilities, the elderly, the homeless and other persons in vulnerable situations; fostering 
resilience and addressing intersecting causes of poverty such as disability or geographical 
dimensions.
10. Inclusive and sustainable economic development (prosperity). UNDP will help 
strengthen the enabling environment to encourage entrepreneurship and innovation, and to 
formalize and accelerate MSMEs towards digitalized, high-productivity, export-oriented and 
environmentally sustainable growth by capitalizing on its partnership with the International 
Labour Organization (ILO) and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) to promote 
financial inclusion and economic empowerment of youth and informal workers.
11. Enhanced climate resilience and natural resource management (planet). UNDP will 
tackle long-term development issues such as climate change mitigation, adaptation and 
biodiversity conservation at scale, using market forces. With the United Nations Human 
Settlement Programme (UN-Habitat), UNDP will promote greater balance between the 
economic potential and quality of life in rural and urban areas. UNDP will work with the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and the International Fund for Agricultural Development to advance sustainable and resilient food production and 
consumption;
12. Transparent governance and rule of law (governance). Through policy support and 
institutional capacity development, UNDP will invest in Sustainable Development Goal 
integration and financing, public finance management, local governance, access to justice, 
access to information and improved services that bring forward innovative integrated policy 
solutions. UNDP will partner with a wide range of stakeholders to develop knowledge products, 
platforms and tools to address the country’s key challenges.
13. UNDP will connect knowledge, experience and solutions with other regional/global 
partners to advance sustainable development for Egypt and from Egypt, and promote SouthSouth and triangular cooperation through its Global Policy Network and Accelerator Labs 
Network, particularly for fighting climate change and sustaining peace. With the support of the 
United Nations Volunteers programme, UNDP will promote volunteerism for implementation 
of Egypt Vision 2030 in line with the national strategy for volunteering.
14. In response to recommendations from the evaluation of the previous country programme
and portfolio reviews, UNDP will deepen the application of corporate development solutions, 
particularly on transitions towards a digital economy; invest in governance and enabling 
environments to enhance end-cycle sustainability of UNDP projects, particularly concerning 
MSME growth and the environment; and seek cross-pillar synergies especially in facilitating 
the transition to a job-rich sustainable and resilient economy.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
15. UNDP will work in partnership with the Government to support recovery from COVID-19
and global supply chain crises, and advance the systems transformation needed for everyone in 
Egypt to enjoy the benefits of an inclusive society and a resilient economy, which are 
increasingly innovative, knowledge-based and environmentally friendly, in line with Egypt 
Vision 2030. The programme’s overarching theory of change suggests that this vision will be 
realized by balancing the needs of the private sector, MSMEs and market actors, bringing about 
the new sustainable economy, and the interests of the public sector to develop the policies and 
tools required not only to facilitate digital and environmentally-friendly transitions, but also to 
provide more data-driven, targeted and effective social protection mechanisms to ensure the 
transition is just and inclusive, particularly for women, youth, and persons with disabilities.
Further, UNDP will support the Government of Egypt in its efforts to leave no one behind and 
improve governance, accountability and participation. 
16. To accelerate these systems transformations, UNDP will provide policy support and 
capacity development and, learning from pilot initiatives adapted and advocated in the Egyptian 
context, develop scalable solutions to accelerate development. Supported by its newly 
established Accelerator Lab, UNDP and stakeholders will explore simultaneous entry points 
for change in the dynamics between market players and in the behaviours of social actors. 
UNDP will develop the capacities, partnerships and incentives required to enrol markets and 
institutions to initiate and sustain change. UNDP will work with specialized national 
counterparts to engage target groups (women/girls, youth and persons with disabilities);
improve skills; reduce barriers to employment and participation; and establish platforms for 
dialogue to expand opportunities. 
Priority people: strengthened human capital.
17. The UNDP contribution to this outcome is grounded in a theory of change that reinforces
the national commitment to social protection, focusing on effectiveness, inclusivity and 
sustainability. In order to empower persons in vulnerable situations, to have more equitable 
access to social protection services, including insurance schemes and access to productive 
employment, the social protection system needs to be more inclusive, equitable, efficient and 
sustainable. This will also require that the necessary life skills and employability of social protection beneficiaries are strengthened to facilitate their socioeconomic empowerment, 
resilience and graduation from social programmes. 
18. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Sustainable 
Development Goals 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10, and to UNDP signature solutions 1, 2, and 6.
19. UNDP will support the digitalization of conditional cash transfer systems to improve
efficiency and evidence-based targeting. It will ensure that social protection packages are truly 
accessible by persons with disabilities, elderly people, people working in the informal sector, 
women in rural areas, people receiving microcredits and other persons in vulnerable situations. 
20. Special focus will be given to broadening social protection, service provision and 
promoting behavioural changes to overcome poverty. UNDP will achieve this with the Ministry 
of Social Solidarity through capacity-building and innovations to support graduation from 
conditional cash transfer programmes to sustainable, autonomous income-generating activities 
for women and persons in particularly vulnerable situations.
21. Field-based non-governmental organizations (NGOs) will be key partners for behavioural 
change outreach and job creation that reduce reliance on cash transfers. Collaboration will be 
strong with ILO, UNICEF and the United Nations Population Fund, with linkages to the 
entrepreneurship support UNDP will provide under outcome 2.
22. UNDP will promote services for people living with or most at risk for HIV by strengthening 
the institutional capacities of national disease programmes for HIV and tuberculosis under the 
Ministry of Health and Population, as well as relevant civil society organizations to scale up 
and sustain treatment and care-related, equitable HIV and tuberculosis services, especially those 
aimed at prevention.
Priority prosperity: inclusive and sustainable economic development.
23. The theory of change for this outcome area focuses on building an inclusive and resilient 
economy by expanding opportunities and access for more people, in particular women and 
youth, and facilitating the transformations needed to accelerate export-oriented and knowledgebased sustainable growth. This will require youth equipped with core digital and entrepreneurial 
skills for future jobs and an outward-looking, diversified and innovative MSME sector. For this 
to translate into more jobs, equal opportunity should be provided through affordable access to 
information technologies and finance, capacity development focusing on entrepreneurship and 
digital inclusion for MSMEs. 
24. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Sustainable 
Development Goals 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10 and 12 and to UNDP signature solutions 1, 3 and 6.
25. Through re-skilling, up-skilling and entrepreneurial programmes, UNDP will boost 
inclusive and sustainable economic development efforts which invest in knowledge- and 
technology-based production and enhance the innovation capacities and competitiveness of the 
economy. UNDP will support emerging innovators and entrepreneurs (especially youth and 
women), with a particular focus on digitalization, to solve priority challenges in agriculture and 
health while creating jobs.
26. Entrepreneurship development will be fostered through the MSME Development Agency 
and the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development. Women’s economic empowerment
will be addressed with the National Council for Women, and digital skills-building for increased 
employability will be advanced in partnership with the Ministry of Communication and 
Information Technology. The transformation of the MSME sector will require that incentives, 
skills transfers, business development services and financing support are provided directly to 
entrepreneurs with regular impact monitoring.
27. Collaboration with United Nations agencies in capacity-building for youth and digital
transformation will be strengthened in alignment with the Generation Unlimited programme, 
with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UNUnion (ITU) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) under the umbrella of the United Nations Joint Team for Digital Transformation 
and Innovation.
28. Entrepreneurship development and employment creation in the sustainable economy and 
sustainable tourism will be coordinated with activities under outcome 3. Entrepreneurship 
solutions will contribute to social protection graduation efforts under outcome 1. Conversely, 
outcome 2 will benefit from the power of new technologies and new sources of data, and digital 
transformation of Government services under outcome 4.
Priority planet: enhanced climate resilience and natural resources management 
29. The theory of change for this outcome area aims at contributing to increased incomes and 
quality of life through a cleaner environment, better protected natural areas and additional
renewable energy sources, while also building the resilience of communities and the economy 
to climate shocks. This will require more efficient, effective and sustainable use of natural 
resources in the economy, including water and biodiversity. It will also require more sustainable 
production and consumption systems and leveraging of investments for adapting rapidly to 
climate change.
30. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Sustainable 
Development Goals 5-7, 11-15, and to UNDP signature solutions 1, 2 and 6.
31. UNDP will promote strategies and mechanisms that incentivize the private sector to invest 
in climate change mitigation and a rapid transition to low-emissions technologies, in line with 
the national commitment for renewable energy to cover 42 per cent of the country’s electricity 
needs by 2030. In collaboration with relevant institutions, UNDP will support the incentive 
mechanisms necessary to implement the Waste Management Law with market-based waste-toenergy initiatives, waste valorization, hazardous waste disposal and reduction of ozone 
depleting substances.
32. In partnership with the Government, UNDP will leverage investments from public 
domestic sources, global funds, local financial institutions and foreign investment for gendersensitive climate change mitigation, adaptation and disaster risk reduction. UNDP will promote 
nature-based innovations to protect lives and livelihoods of communities affected by climate 
change, and support value chains to scale up sustainable, climate-smart, biologically diverse, 
healthy and income-generating agricultural practices.
33. UNDP will mainstream community-based natural resource management approaches in 
protected areas, whilst accelerating market-based solutions and private investment in ecotourism and biodiversity conservation, building on the country’s sixth national report to the 
Convention on Biological Diversity.
34. To balance economic growth, urbanization and sustainable use of natural resources and 
develop 15 per cent of the country’s land by 2052,
9 UNDP and UN-Habitat will foster 
multilevel, consultative, sustainable spatial planning, in support of the Government’s General 
Organization for Physical Planning to ensure economically efficient and environmentally sound 
land use that optimizes resources and development opportunities for all.
35.Ecotourism, as part of UNDP support to sustainable tourism, will play a transformative role 
in achieving this outcome. UNDP will engage large-scale programmes such as the national 
project for the development of Egyptian villages (Haya Kareema) to devise replicable models 
for integrated climate change mitigation and adaptation initiatives. Civil society, business 
associations and NGOs will support public awareness campaigns and implementation of nature 
conservation and sustainable economy initiatives. Communication and mass media channels 
will be important tools to support attitudinal change and trigger market transformation to lowcarbon technologies and applications. 36. UNDP will coordinate its initiatives under this outcome with those under outcome 1 to 
support local communities and especially poor women living in and around the protected areas, 
and under outcome 2 to help farmers and value chains adapt to climate change with new and 
improved business models.
37. UNDP will collaborate with FAO, UNESCO, the World Food Programme (WFP) and 
others, including on the national climate change adaptation monitoring and evaluation and early 
warning systems.
Priority governance: transparency, good governance and the rule of law
38. The theory of change for this outcome area suggests that accelerated progress toward the 
Sustainable Development Goals can be attained through evidence-based, integrated 
development policies, strengthened governance and more equitable access to efficient services, 
including e-government, and access to justice and information. The pathway to this objective 
involves improved and coordinated financing for the Goals, better data and monitoring and 
evaluation mechanisms, enhanced local administration supporting integrated local 
development, and e-governance that enhances access to data and affordable services for 
individuals.
39. Initiatives under this outcome area will contribute to national objectives under Goals 5, 10, 
16 and 17, and to UNDP signature solutions 1, 2 and 6.
40. UNDP will support an evidence-based approach to advancing progress towards all Goals
by 2030 via dedicated data platforms, localization of the Goals and impact assessments. 
41. To improve and future-proof development policy and development planning across 
ministries and institutions, UNDP will collaborate with public administrations to enhance 
human and institutional capacities at national and local levels to use big data and foresight 
techniques to inform policy frameworks and accelerate systemic transformations. 
42. To scale up financing for the Sustainable Development Goals, UNDP will promote a 
national strategy following the integrated national financing framework approach. This will
inform domestic resource mobilization efforts (e.g., through the Tax Inspectors Without 
Borders programme), increase the efficiency of public financial management and encourage 
innovative financing modalities. Partners on financing of the Goals include the Ministry of 
Finance, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of International 
Cooperation, and the private sector. UNDP will coordinate its efforts together with ILO, the 
International Monetary Fund, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), UNICEF, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and UNWomen.
43. In order to leverage the private capital necessary to bridge the gap in financing for the 
Goals and help orient capital towards the agreed targets, UNDP will work with investors, 
investees, market intermediaries and business associations to mainstream impact investment 
practices, identify new opportunities through investment maps and improve standards through 
impact management, monitoring and reporting tools. 
44. UNDP will partner with the Ministry of Local Development to develop a decentralized 
local administration system in selected governorates using digital solutions. This process will 
promote integrated local development and uphold excellence and equity in local public service 
delivery to advance local economic and social development.
45. UNDP will strengthen institutional capacity of duty bearers and advocacy for rights 
holders, as part of the National Strategy for Human Rights in collaboration with the Supreme 
Standing Committee for Human Rights. UNDP will support the anti-corruption efforts of the 
Administrative Control Authority and the follow-up of Egyptian commitments under the United 
Nations Convention against Corruption.
46To improve human-centredinclusive servicesUNDP will promote efficienttransparent especially for individuals with limited access to and use of the Internet. UNDP will support the 
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology with innovations that lead to 
improved Internet access for all.
47. To strengthen the rule of law, improve access to judicial services and address the large case 
backlogs in the judicial system, UNDP will prioritize access to legal aid for women and 
accelerate the automation and digitalization of family courts for accessible quality and quick 
services to litigants. UNDP will help develop capacities at the Ministry of Justice by providing 
technical assistance and knowledge exchange with other countries. 
48. UNDP will support national institutions, including the Cairo International Center for 
Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding and the Aswan Forum, to deepen 
regional/global partnerships, facilitate South-South cooperation and increase the numbers of 
development solutions exchanged.
III. Programme and risk management 
49. As an integral part of the UNSDCF, the country programme will be governed by the Joint 
Government of Egypt-United Nations Steering Committee and outcome results groups cochaired by government entities. A UNDP programme board will be established to take stock 
regularly of achievements and discuss evolving contexts and priorities with government 
counterparts.
50. UNDP together with its partners will use an anticipatory and adaptive management 
approach to respond to changes and opportunities in the development context. Projects at the 
inception stage will systematically emphasize data capture and proof-of-concept activities 
building on experiences of the Accelerator Lab.
51. Global geopolitical tensions, accelerated climate change and other source of instability 
presents a risk to food security, livelihoods and social cohesion linked to supply constraints, 
price increases and difficulty to finance imports. UNDP will work with government and United 
Nations partners on early warning mechanisms, policy support to national responses and 
increased resilience. UNDP will manage the related risk of more limited and volatile financing 
by pursuing new partnerships. Since programme implementation relies heavily on leveraging 
and empowering capacities of national institutions, capacities will be specifically monitored 
and enhanced.
52. UNDP will strive to enhance non-financial partnerships, register the investments UNDP 
leverages from private capital for the Sustainable Development Goals, and diversify the UNDP 
resource base, ensuring balance among government cost-sharing, bilateral funding, donors that 
are not members of the OECD Development Assistance Committee and vertical funds. 
53. UNDP will apply the revised social and environmental standards and accountability 
mechanism, and enterprise risk management policy to enhance programme quality, and conduct 
regular quality assurance and risk assessments throughout the programme cycle.
54. This country programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
the organization’s programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control 
framework.
55. The programme will be nationally executed. National execution may be replaced by direct 
execution for part or all of the programme when deemed necessary or to enable response to 
force majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion 
with other United Nations agencies to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned 
projects.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
56. The outcomes and performance indicators of the country programme have been aligned to 
the UNDP Strategic Plan 2022-2025, the UNSDCF, the national development strategy Egypt 
Vision 2030, Egypt’s voluntary national reviews on progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals10 and nationally-owned data platforms. UNDP will introduce remote 
sensing, online feedback mechanisms, real-time monitoring and evaluations to augment 
national data sources. Regular monitoring across outputs and outcomes will be undertaken with 
partners under the guidance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and via joint United Nations 
workplans. The high-level annual UNSDCF review will be co-chaired by the Ministry of 
International Cooperation. UNDP will use UN INFO and national data systems for consistent 
reporting of results.
57. UNDP will work with the Ministry of Planning and Economic Development and affiliated 
institutes, other United Nations agencies and Egypt-based researchers, public and private think 
tanks to improve and make sustainable the national capacities for monitoring and reporting on 
the Sustainable Development Goals by bridging data gaps, developing baselines for key 
indicators, greater disaggregation of data and measuring long-term impact. UNDP will 
collaborate with partners to develop data-rich knowledge products such as national human 
development reports, subnational human development indices and thematic policy 
briefs/studies. 
58. UNDP will conduct and draw upon gender-sensitive midterm and terminal evaluations of 
projects, portfolios and programmes, including quantitative impact assessments, for policy 
advice, advocacy, project design and programme reorientation where needed. UNDP will 
strengthen its monitoring and evaluation function by adopting appropriate results-based 
management practices for all new results frameworks, progress and evaluation reports.
59. UNDP will increase visibility of results in support of national objectives by using 
appropriate media platforms and strategies, and by allocating at least 5 per cent of the 
programme budget to cover monitoring, evaluation and communications costs. Annex. Results and resources framework for Egypt (2023-2027)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Develop and Invest in Human Capital (Government Action Plan 2023 – 2027)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME #1: By 2027, strengthened human capital through equal access to quality services, social protection and social justice ensured for all people
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: No-one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human development
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME 
OUTPUTS 
MAJOR 
PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME ($)
1.7 SDG Indicator 1.2: Percentage of population 
below national poverty line. 
Baseline: 32.5% (2017-2018); 
Target: 21.9% (2030)
1.3 Percentage of adults and children living with 
HIV currently receiving antiretroviral therapy
Baseline: 24% (2020), 44% (2020), Men (45%), 
Women (38%), Children (71%); 
Target: 90% (2025), Men (90%), Women (90%), 
Children (100%)
Household Income and Consumption 
Expenditures Surveys
HIV National M&E plan (2021-2025) 
- National AIDS Program, MoHP 
Output 1.1. Social protection system is 
strengthened for efficiency and effectiveness to 
leave no one behind 
Indicator 1.1.1: Proportion of population covered 
by at least one social protection benefit, 
disaggregated by sex
Baseline (2022): 4%; Target: 7% (Integrated results 
and resources framework of the UNDP Strategic 
Plan, 2022-2025 (IRRF) indicator 1.2)
Indicator 1.1.2: Number of suitable jobs created for 
beneficiaries to durably graduate from conditional 
cash transfer programmes.
Baseline: zero (2021); Target: 220
Indicator 1.1.3: Number of households whose 
knowledge, attitude and practices towards key sociobehavioural issues are improved.
Baseline (2022): zero; Target: 4 million households
Output 1.2. More people, receive stigma-free 
quality preventive and curative health care 
services.
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of Key Populations who 
access HIV prevention and testing services.
Baseline (2021): 5,487; 
Target (2025): 25,000;
Ministries: Social 
Solidarity; Health and 
Population (MoHP)
European Union
Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis 
and Malaria
Regular
161,000
Other
29,471,000NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Enhancing productivity and Employment (Government Action Program 2023 –2027)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME #2: By 2027, enhanced people-centred inclusive and sustainable economic development driven by industrialization, productivity growth, 
decent jobs, digitalization and integrating the informal economy.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions
2.1 Share of MSMEs contribution to GDP 
Baseline: ~ 33% in 2018; target: TBD 
2.8 Rank of Egypt in the global innovation index. 
Baseline: 94 (2021), 
target: 89 (2027)
CAPMAS
CAPMAS (Economic census 
2017/2018)
WIPO
Output 2.1 Policy frameworks, technical and 
financial support improved for MSME sector
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of new innovative 
initiatives, mechanisms and programs, enabling 
MSMEs, including women-owned MSMEs, 
formalization, financing, productivity in new sectors
Baseline: zero; 
Target: 15, of which gender-sensitive: 5
Indicator 2.1.2: No. of quality jobs created with 
UNDP support 
Baseline: (2021) 280,000: zero; 
Target (2027): 1,215,000, of which: 60% Youth and 
40% Women:
Indicator 2.1.3: No. and value (in Egyptian pounds)
of loans facilitated 
Baseline (2021): 18,070 loans (Women = 18%) & 
EGP 2,481 million; 
Target (2027): 64,596 loans (Women = 40%) & EGP
8,871 million
Output 2.2 Entrepreneurship and innovation 
ecosystem is strengthened
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of business ideas generated 
by youth and supported through innovation and 
entrepreneurship promotion.
Baseline: 300,000 (women 25%); 
Target: 700,000 (women: 30%)
Indicator 2.2.2: Number of start-ups supported by 
UNDP 
Baseline: 227; Target: 600 (Women: 25%)
Indicator 2.2.3: Number of innovative solutions 
adopted by programme partners, which expanded 
policy and development option – IRRF E.2.2
Baseline: 0 (2022); Target: 2
Micro, Small, and 
Medium Enterprise 
Development Agency
Ministries: Planning 
and Economic 
Development; 
Communications and 
Information 
Technology;
International
Cooperation; Youth 
and Sports 
CAPMAS, 
Private Sector
Civil society 
Technology 
Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 
Center
Chambers of 
Commerce
UN-Women, ITU, 
UNESCO, United 
Nations Joint Team 
for Digital 
Transformation and 
Innovation
Regular
2,034,000
Other
167,766,000Output 2.3 E-literacy, capacities in digital 
transformation, and emerging technologies for 
productive employment strengthened.
Indicator 2.3.1: No. of youth and women with 
improved digital skills 
Baseline: 200,000/year, 1 million online training; 
Target: 750,000/year, 2 million online training/ year 
(Women: 40%)
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of youths benefiting from 
career guidance and mentoring.
Baseline: 0; Target: 800,000 (40% women)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Sustainable natural resource management for food security and climate change resilience (Government Action Plan 2023 – 2027)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME #3: By 2027, enhanced climate resilience and efficiency of natural resource management for all people in a sustainable environment
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk
3.2 Value of agriculture Production (Billion EGP)
Baseline: 534.6 (2019)
Target: TBD
3.6 Carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP based 
on Purchasing Power Parity (PPP)
Baseline: 0.19 (2018)
CAPMAS
International Energy Agency 
Output 3.1: Sustainable, efficient incomegenerating agricultural systems are developed 
Indicator 3.1.2: Number of initiatives to diversify 
farmers income, adapt to climate change and 
preserve farm biodiversity.
Baseline: Zero; Target: 2 (Targeting women: 1) 
Output 3.2: Capacities and systems are 
strengthened for the preparedness, early 
warning, response and transformations, to adapt 
and reduce impacts of climate change and other 
disasters and shocks.
Indicator 3.2.1: Number of policies, plans, 
infrastructure, and M&E systems, increasing 
capacity for adaptation.
Baseline (2018): 3; Target (2027): 6
Indicator 3.2.2: No of people in climate vulnerable 
areas benefiting from climate change adaptation 
community development/income generation 
activities: 
Baseline (2020): Zero; Target (2027): 60 women/40 
men
Output 3.3: A just transition to sustainable 
economy and the associated jobs is accelerated 
Ministries:
Environment; 
Water Resources and 
Irrigation; Agriculture
and Land Reclamation; 
Crisis and Disaster 
Management Unit, 
Information and 
Decision Support 
Center 
FAO, WFP, UNESCO, 
UN-Habitat, UNDRR
Regular
694,000
Other
48,806,000Target: TBD
3.8 SDG Indicator 7.b.1 (Proxy): Renewable 
energy share in total energy production
Baseline: 12% (2019)
Target : TBD
Ministry of Electricity and 
Renewable Energy
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of policies, regulatory 
frameworks, technologies, financial mechanisms, 
tools, put in place that facilitate market 
transformations
Baseline: 3; Target: 8
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of greenhouse gas
mitigation technologies/approaches introduced 
Baseline (2018): 3 (LED, high-quality bus service 
system); 
Target (2026): 6 
Indicator 3.3.3: Greenhouse gas emissions 
reduction triggered (in tonnes CO2eq/year). 
Baseline (2021): 8,500; Target (2027): 20,000
Indicator 3.3.4: Number of jobs and livelihoods 
created through management of natural resources 
and ecosystems services. IRRF 4.1.1
Baseline: 24,000 (10,000 women); 
Target: 100,000 (50,000 women) 
Indicator 3.3.5 Number of new national gendersensitive knowledge products documenting 
compliance with international environmental 
conventions on biodiversity and climate change 
Baseline: 0; Target: 3
Indicator 3.3.6: Ozone-depleting substances retired
Baseline: 386.27 ozone-depleting potential tonnes; 
Target: 1,947
Output 3.4: Capacities of national and local 
governments strengthened for efficient and 
sustainable spatial and economic planning
Indicator 3.4.1: Number of initiatives developed, 
capacitated and deployed for sustainable spatial 
development 
Baseline (2022): 1; Target: 4
Ministries: Electricity 
and Renewable Energy; 
Tourism and 
Antiquities
UNIDO
IFIs
Ministries: Housing 
and Urban 
Communities;
General Organization 
for Physical Planning
UN-HabitatNATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Transparency, Governance and Inclusive Partnerships (Government Action Plan 2023 – 2027)
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME #4: By 2027, people have improved, safe and equal access to information, protection, justice and a peaceful and inclusive society through 
transparent, accountable, participatory, effective and efficient governance based on the rule of law and international norms and standards.
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions; 
4.3. Number of data collection and/or
analysis mechanisms providing
disaggregated data to monitor progress
towards the SDGs, incl. innovative data
sources (IRRF 1.1.3).
Baseline: TBD; Target: TBD
4.9 SDG indicator 17.3.1: Foreign direct 
investment, official development 
assistance and South-South cooperation
as a proportion of gross national income.
Baseline: FDI 3% of GDP (2019), ODA 
0.6% of GNI (2019); 
Target: TBD
4.1. Number of court orders rendered 
through the application of an automated 
system.
Baseline: 0; Target: TBD
SDG 17.8.1 - IRRF 1.2: Proportion of 
individuals using the Internet:
Baseline (2022) 57.3 % (Female 41.3%, 
Male 52.4% - 2018)
IRRF E.1.3 – Number of people using 
digital technologies and services in ways 
that improves their lives – Proxy: 
subscribers to digital Egypt platform.
Baseline (2021): 4.2 million; Target 
(2027) 15 million
Ministry of Planning and Economic
Development 
Ministry of Finance
World Bank 
Ministry of Justice 
Cassation Court 
Office of the Prosecutor General /Public 
Prosecution Office 
CAPMAS
Output 4.1 Capacities for evidence-based policy 
formulation for SDGs integration and financing 
strengthened 
Indicator 4.1.1 (SDG indicator 17.14.1): Data 
platforms and coordination mechanisms in place to 
enhance policy coherence of sustainable development.
Baseline (2022): 1; Target: 3
Indicator 4.1.2: Number of officials with enhanced 
capacity on Human Rights, risk-informed 
development, M&E and digital tools.
Baseline: 0; Target: 400
Output 4.2 Institutional capacities of relevant 
governance institutions strengthened, including 
through digital solutions 
Indicator 4.2.1: Number of new systems, policies, 
tools developed and deployed for improved 
institutional efficiency and accountability 
Baseline: 0; Target: (Justice: 1, Human Rights:1 anticorruption: 1; telecommunication; e-government
services: 150)
Indicator 4.2.2 Number of people supported who
have access to justice (IRRF 2.2.3. UNSDCF 4.4)
Baseline: 0; Target: 2,000 men, 3,000 women
Indicator 4.2.3: Number of post offices modernized 
to provide e-government, financial and non-financial 
services
Baseline: 2,500; Target: 4,000
Indicator 4.2.4: Increase in mobile broadband 
spectrum assigned and managed for commercial use. 
Baseline:0; Target: 40%
Ministries: Planning and 
Economic Development;
Finance; Local Development; 
Justice; Communication and 
Information Technology; 
International Cooperation;
National Institute for 
Governance and Sustainable 
Development
Islamic Development Bank
CAPMAS
Supreme Standing Committee 
for Human Rights 
Administrative Control 
Authority
Regular:
993,000
Other:
102,207,000Output 4.3: Policies, institutional capacities and 
tools enhanced to improve local services, economic 
and social development, monitoring and evaluation
Indicator 4.3.1 (IRRF 2.3.2): Number of new 
measures that improved agility and responsiveness of 
local governance institutions. 
Baseline: zero; Target: 6
Indicator 4.3.2: Number of NGOs involved in 
programme execution and trained in financial 
management/planning, development solutions 
Baseline: 0; Target: 50
Output 4.4: Capacities for and exchange of 
integrated development solutions 
Indicator 4.4.1. Number of innovative, evidencebased solutions exchanged with other countries and 
scaled up
Baseline: 8; Target: 24
Indicator 4.4.2: Number of people gaining capacity 
through South-South exchanges, incl. in peacebuilding 
and peacekeeping, 
Baseline: 5,087 (women: 34%); 
Target: 10,087 (women: 40%)
Cairo International Center for 
Conflict Resolution, 
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding