File Name: ERI-CPD-2021-EN
Year: 2021
Country Name: Eritrea
Country Code: ERI
Category: CPD
Document Title: nan
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 30 August–2 September 2021
Start Year: 2022
End Year: 2026
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
29 June 2021
Original: English
2108851X (E) 160721
Second regular session 2021
30 August–2 September 2021, New York
Item 5 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Eritrea (2022-2026)
Contents
Page
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework................. 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….……….… 4
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 8
Annex
Results and resources framework for Eritrea (2022-2026)......................................................... 9I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework
1. In 1991 Eritrea emerged from nearly 30 years of armed struggle for independence from 
Ethiopia; its independence wasformalized in a 1993 referendum. The country enjoyed a short 
period of state consolidation and development before plunging into a border war with 
Ethiopia that lasted from May 1998 to June 2000. Even after the formal end of the war 
through the Algiers Peace Agreement, Eritrea experienced a tense 18-year period, described 
as a time of ‘no war, no peace’, in a period of imposed international sanctions. These events 
delayed the process of nation-building.
2. The socioeconomic and political challenges were aggravated as focus shifted away 
from the pursuit of a sustainable development agenda to security and sovereignty concerns.
Within this historical context, Eritrea is pursuing its current national priorities, which include 
reducing poverty, ensuring food security, addressing environmental degradation,
strengthening disaster risk management, conserving biodiversity, enhancing capacity for 
competent public service delivery, empowering women and mobilizing required resources. 
Responding to these national priorities is critical for the achievement of the Sustainable 
Development Goals.
3. Achieving the priorities requires sustained economic growth. However, between 2000 
and 2020, gross domestic product growth rates averaged about 4.93 per cent1 with a record 
low of –9.17 per cent in 2008. The highest rates were recorded in 2001 (8.76 per cent) and 
2011 (8.68 per cent).
2 The country registered a growth rate of 3.8 per cent in 2019, which 
dropped to 0.6 per cent in 2020, but there is a positive projection of 5.7 per cent for 2021.
3
About 58 per cent of the population is currently living below the poverty line. The poverty is 
accentuated by the fact that 65 per cent of the population lives in rural areas and depends
predominantly on rainfed agriculture for livelihood.
4. The country is ranked 180 out of 189 countries in the 2020 Human Development 
Report,
4 with a Human Development Index score of 0.459. It is off-track to achieve the Goals 
by 2030. The gender equality score is low, at 34.7,
5
and exemplified by a high maternal 
mortality ratio of 480 per 100,000 live births6, though the government contest that according 
to “estimates” from the Ministry of Health of Eritrea, the maternal mortality ratio stood at 
258 deaths per 100,000 live births in 2018 and 184 per 100,000 live births in 2019.
5. Relations with Ethiopia began to thaw in July 2018, following the signing of the Joint 
Declaration of Peace and Friendship7and subsequent lifting of international sanctions. This
raised the prospect that Eritrea could once again resume its quest for sustainable peace and 
development.
6. The improved relations with Ethiopia also provide an unprecedented opportunity for 
regional integration, investment and trade. However, while Eritrea forges ahead to improve
ties with Ethiopia and other countries in the region, events in Ethiopia have implications for 
Eritrea’s stated interest in improving regional peace, security, trade and integration. These 
events include the conflict in Tigray, the border tension between Ethiopia and Sudan, and the 
unresolved dispute on the use of the Nile waters among Ethiopia, Sudan and Egypt.
7. Furthermore, allegations of involvement by Eritrea in the Tigray conflict could have 
implications for its international re-engagement and partnership building and the financing 
environment for the Goals. Though there are opportunities within the emerging context, 
Eritrea faces daunting systemic challenges that impede its development pathway. These 
1 https://tradingeconomics.com/eritrea/gdp-growth-annual, accessed 22 April 2021.
2 https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/ERI/eritrea/economic-growth-rate, accessed 22 April 2021.
3 https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/east-africa/eritrea/eritrea-economic-outlook, accessed 22 April 2021.
4 http://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr2020.pdf.
5
IIAG Index, 2020.
6 Human Development Report 2020.include the limited capacity of institutions to fulfil their mandates and lagging formulation 
and implementation of policies and regulations. The coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19) has 
had severe socioeconomic impacts, especially in the informal sector. It has stressed social 
safety nets and added to the complexity of the country’s development challenges, namely:
(a) Lack of requisite institutions with the capacities to lead and sustain development 
in the medium to long term. 
(b) Environmental degradation and climate change, which have undermined ecosystem 
resilience, hampering food security and livelihoods among households and communities
dependent on natural resources. Unpredictable weather hampers the ability of ecosystems to 
support resilient and sustainable livelihoods. It also contributes to water scarcity, land 
degradation, natural hazards and disasters, exacerbating human vulnerabilities and social, 
economic and gender disparities.
(c) Lack of inclusive, diversified and sustainable economic growth. The
macroeconomic outlook has been constrained by a tight fiscal space, worsened by limited 
development assistance and foreign direct investment.8 The economy has relied on the 
monetization of debt, contributing to significant debt overhang and inflationary pressures. 
The estimated debt-to-gross domestic product ratio is about 267 per cent, making Eritrea one 
of the most heavily indebted countries. 
Eritrea also faces supply-side constraints due to dependence on exports of a few commodities
and agricultural raw materials, which are susceptible to external shocks. While the national 
unemployment rate stands at 5.1 per cent,
9
close to 57.4 per cent of the population has
vulnerable employment, and the informal economy accounts for 58.2 per cent of total 
employment. Youth unemployment, at 8.8 per cent, is above the national average. 
(d) The commendable strategy of self-reliance, which heavily influences the Eritrea 
approach to external development support and engagement with development partners, and 
which took root during the independence struggle and subsequent period of isolation. This
history underpins its hesitancy in accepting partners and development support, making the
country particularly susceptible to oscillating relations with development partners. The 
challenge for UNDP remains how to continue a healthy dialogue and build trust with the 
Government to ensure sufficient support for the Goals in a manner that respects Eritrean
dignity and aspirations. 
(e) The critical need for relevant, current data to inform policy- and decision-making. 
The lack of high-quality sex-disaggregated data continues to affect the monitoring and 
reporting of the Goals. Due to repurposing and reprioritization of programme funds prompted 
by COVID-19, there was a shortfall in implementation of the big data agenda10 in the previous 
programme cycle. The planned update of the Eritrea Population and Health Survey was
deferred. The last one was produced in 2010 with UNDP support and is the only governmentrecognized reference available for development planning.
8. Enhancing the capacities of key institutions to address these challenges will have a 
catalytic impact on the country’s ability to ensure service delivery and realize its national 
vision. In the context of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation 
Framework (UNSDCF 2022-2026), UNDP is strategically positioned to offer policy, 
operational and programme support for nation-building, targeting priority areas jointly 
identified with the Government: Pillar I, on human development and well-being, and Pillar 
II, on an inclusive, diversified, green and climate-resilient economy. Of the four outcomes in 
the UNSDCF the UNDP country programme will prioritize three outcomes, one under Pillar 
I and two under Pillar II. 
8 See IMF Article IV Consultations in 2019
9
International Labour Organization, 2019,
10 Country programme document output 3.1: National institutions are able to collect, analyse and use data for planning and decision-making, including for 9. The priority areas are also aligned with the UNDP Strategic Plan (2017-2021),
11 the 
Africa Agenda 2063, Agenda 2030, the UNDP Gender Strategy 2018-2021 and the renewed 
UNDP Africa Offer, which prioritizes six impact areas12 and six associated critical 
foundational enablers.
13 UNDP will exploit its comparative advantage and its integrator role 
as the leading development agency to support implementation of the UNSDCF. 
10. Specifically, the country office will harness UNDP corporate tools and instruments —
among others, the UNDP Africa Promise, the renewed COVID Response 2.0, the Global 
Policy Network and the regional thematic hubs — to work with partners in providing tangible 
development solutions. The country office will also support mainstreaming, localization and 
financing of the Goals; invest in data and statistics for tracking, monitoring and reporting 
development results; and establish support platforms to accelerate implementation of the 
Goals. This will draw on collaboration with United Nations organizations through Delivering 
as One and implementation of global collaborative compacts. 
11. Building on the experience of the 2017-2021 country programme and the findings of 
its terminal evaluation, UNDP will work to ensure the relevance, coherence, effectiveness, 
efficiency and sustainability of the country programme. Lessons from the previous 
programme demonstrate the imperative of balancing upstream and downstream support, 
avoiding fragmentation and expansion of interventions, enacting a national monitoring and 
evaluation framework, and addressing delays in programme delivery.
12. The new country programme also takes into consideration the long-term socioeconomic 
impact of COVID-19 as outlined in the assessment study by the United Nations country team 
and within the context of ‘A UN framework for the immediate socio-economic response to 
COVID-19’.
14 In contributing to the response and recovery, UNDP will aim to build forward 
better by working to broadly engage society and the government. It will implement ‘digital 
by default’ and seek new solutions, applying the principle of leave no one behind and the 
United Nations Common Guidance on Helping Build Resilient Societies to strengthen 
coherence in resilience-building efforts in support of governments' sustainable development 
objectives.
II. Programme priorities and partnerships
13. The 2022-2026 country programme is aligned with the national priorities (2021); 
guided by the signature solutions in the UNDP Strategic Plan (2018-2021) and the renewed 
Africa Offer; and committed to the principles of gender equality, leave no one behind and 
reaching those furthest behind first. Based on the comparative advantage of UNDP and the 
broad strengths of the United Nations agencies, and cognizant of the partnerships and donor 
landscape in Eritrea, the country programme will support efforts to build strong and resilient 
governance institutions, structures and systems that deliver more effective, efficient and 
accountable public services. 
14. It will aim towards a more inclusive, sustainable and resilient society that can cope with 
climate change, disasters and shocks, including COVID-19. The objective will be to 
strengthen systems to address the challenges. In working to achieve programme outcomes 
and outputs, the focus will be on stronger evidence-based, data-driven programming and
integration across the governance, environment, energy and climate change sectors.
15. The programme will strengthen partnerships with diverse stakeholders across the Goals, 
focusing investments in areas that have the potential to accelerate progress across multiple 
Goals. The programme will support government efforts to promote regional integration, 
brokering knowledge and technology through South-South and triangular cooperation to 
11 UNDP Strategic Plan (2017-2021) and the successor Strategic Plan 2022-2025.
12 The six impact areas: (1) Natural resource governance; (2) structural transformation; (3) youth and women employment and empowerment; (4) climate 
change mitigation and adaptation; (5) affordable and sustainable energy; and (6) peace and security.
13 The six foundational enablers: (1) Governance of things; (2) digital transformation; (3) sustainable/innovative financing; (4) strategic communications 
and partnerships; (5) South-South cooperation; and (6) development intelligence.mobilize domestic resources, exploit alternative financing mechanisms and boost new 
sources of financing (public, private, domestic, international). 
16. The theory of change of the country programme is based on the expectation that by the 
end of the cycle the people of Eritrea will experience improvements in the delivery of public 
services, a more inclusive society and greater resilience to the impacts of disasters and climate 
change. This will lead to improved well-being among the citizens and an inclusive, 
diversified, green and climate-resilient economy.
Pillar I: Human development and well-being
17. Pillar I concentrates on strengthening inclusive governance and institutions for 
development effectiveness and accountability; improving service provision, civic 
participation, innovation, gender equality and respect for human rights and the rule of law;
and consolidating peace. It also addresses strengthening the capacity of oversight institutions
and systems to fulfil international commitments and increase engagement with the regional 
and international development community. The pillar will drive transformation in public 
service delivery by targeting key government institutions, benefiting the Eritrean population 
at large but focusing more on youth, women and vulnerable groups. 
18. UNDP will continue to support the Government in its efforts to ensure more effective, 
transparent and accountable governance for all Eritreans. It will collaborate with national and 
local governments to link implementation of policies and ensure greater ownership and 
sustainability of interventions. The country programme prioritizes enablers for successful 
implementation of interventions, including deploying digital solutions, mainly by 
strengthening the capacity of selected institutions.
15
19. The programme will support development of national statistical capacity to improve 
data management. This includes making use of new methods for data generation
(disaggregated by sex, gender, age, disability), including ‘big data’. The programme will
promote the establishment of a civil registration system and gender-sensitive economic 
indicators and national accounts. It will work to strengthen capacities to adapt the indicator 
framework of the Sustainable Development Goals to the national context. This will be 
complemented by efforts to improve citizen access to data for feedback and learning. 
20. UNDP will work with United Nations organizations and other development partners to 
address data gaps crucial for national development planning. UNDP will promote inclusive 
access to timely and effective justice through support to e-justice systems, community courts
and paralegal services. More emphasis will be given to strengthening the technical and 
financial capabilities of the office of the Attorney General and law enforcement institutions 
to improve transparency and accountability. 
21. UNDP will continue to support national efforts to implement the Convention on the 
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and prepare the 
Universal Periodic Review report, including by developing implementation plans and 
strengthening coordination. These are important anchors to advance human rights. In line 
with the Gender Equality Strategy (2018-2021, and its successor), UNDP will support the 
Government to produce baseline data on gender, designate and train gender focal points in 
government offices, and advocate for gender equality and mainstreaming. 
22. UNDP will contribute to the Eritrea regional integration agenda through trade 
facilitation, logistics support and capacity-building to maximize efficiency and 
competitiveness in customs clearance and improve the quality of international trade data.
UNDP will partner with the International Organization for Migration (IOM) to support the 
development of a diaspora policy/strategy and a policy framework on diaspora investments, 
bonds and remittances. This will harness the knowledge of Eritrean professionals around the 
15 National Statistics Office, Office of Auditor General, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Information, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, world to strengthen capacities in ministries and public institutions, including mobilization of 
financial resources for development.
Pillar II: Inclusive, diversified, green and climate-resilient economy 
23. UNDP’s contribution in Pillar II will be to help strengthen public sector institutions for 
inclusive, diversified and green growth that is responsive to climate change. It will help public 
sector institutions in developing investment policies and strategies to support micro, small 
and medium-scale enterprises (MSMEs), and within the context of green recovery from 
COVID-19. The interventions will also ensure that people have the capacity to adopt 
technologies and practices that support economic growth and livelihoods at local and national 
levels.
24. Such support will aid the identification of robust value chains and market access for 
MSMEs. With the goal of inclusive and diversified growth, UNDP will work to enable rural
men and women of all ages to equitably access and sustainably utilize natural resources to
improve their livelihoods. Protecting natural resources will be a crucial element of this pillar.
UNDP will provide policy and programmatic support for improving access to equitable, 
affordable and efficient renewable and clean energy, enabling communities to respond and 
adapt to risks and shocks induced by climate change. 
25. Collaborating with United Nations and other development entities, UNDP will work to 
remove barriers and provide support to build robust, diversified and integrated value chains
in agriculture, focusing on MSMEs, especially those involving youth and women. Improving
agricultural value chains will lead to better market linkages for farmers. Smallholder farmers 
and the agriculture sector as a whole will benefit from the virtuous circle of improvements in 
value chains and productivity.
26. Partnering with civil society organizations, relevant United Nations entities, the private 
sector and financial institutions, UNDP will support young entrepreneurs to build and 
diversify their enterprises and adopt new and inclusive business models. It will also facilitate 
the creation of more productive green jobs for women and youth in formal and informal 
businesses. UNDP will foster establishment of platforms to help young women and men to 
improve their vocational, business and financial literacy. 
27. UNDP will support the Government and communities in building resilience to shocks 
and crises induced by natural hazards and other events, such as droughts, epidemics, conflicts 
and economic crises. As part of COVID-19 recovery, UNDP will partner with the 
Government to aid in managing these risks by strengthening the social safety net to help
people to cope with transitory poverty. 
28. UNDP will strengthen national capacities for crisis response and post-crisis recovery, 
evidence-based climate change adaptation, early warning, disaster risk reduction and social 
protection. UNDP will address biodiversity loss in a gender-based and sustainable way by 
tackling market, policy and governance failures that have led to ecosystem degradation and 
loss of livelihoods. 
29. UNDP will collaborate with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO), United Nations Environment Programme, International Fund for 
Agricultural Development (IFAD), IOM and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs. It will also strengthen its partnership with the Global Environment Facility and Green 
Climate Fund, the Poverty-Environment Initiative and the United Nations Collaborative 
Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation in 
Developing Countries. UNDP will advocate for gender-responsive, pro-poor economic 
growth and environmental sustainability in all economic policies, planning systems and 
institutions for managing natural resources and maintaining ecosystems.
30. UNDP will promote access to clean and affordable energy by rural and poor urban 
people for sustainable development that is responsive to their needs, consistent with Goal 7 
aspirations. UNDP will also support promotion of innovations in renewable, clean and affordable energy for economic and social development. In delivering this solution, UNDP 
will work closely with relevant United Nations entities under the UN energy framework and 
the Sustainable Energy for All initiative. The transition to efficient, clean and affordable 
energy will also help the country to reduce consumption of biomass and diesel fuels, thereby 
reducing the harmful impacts of indoor and outdoor air pollution, particularly for women and 
children.
III. Programme and risk management
31. This country programme document outlines UNDP’s contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountability for managers at the 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in 
the organization’s Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and Internal Control 
Framework.
32. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme to enable response to force 
majeure. The harmonized approach to cash transfers will be used in coordination with other 
United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications 
for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.
New implementing partners will be assessed for their capacity to execute projects, which will 
inform cash transfer modality. Identified risks will be mitigated through training and 
implementation of robust assurance measures such as spot checks, field visits and joint 
monitoring.
33. From the 2019 audit by the Office of Audit and Investigation and the 2017-2021 country 
programme terminal evaluation, potential risks were identified that could pose a threat to the 
smooth implementation of the programme. They include (a) limited absorptive capacity of 
national institutions and human capacity to deliver on results, (b) changing government 
priorities and institutional arrangements in the course of implementation, (c) limited access 
to resources, (d) regional conflict and (e) ongoing restrictions due to COVID-19.
34. The country office will work to strengthen enterprise risk management including 
through conducting social and environmental impact assessments for all projects, 
strengthening capacities (of both people and institutions), and seeking new financing sources
and programming in new areas such as social protection and regional integration. Though 
hampered by limited internet penetration in Eritrea and the digital focus of service delivery
platforms, the country office will strive to implement the digital by default tools to enhance 
service delivery. 
35. The SCF-country programme Partnerships and Communications Action Plan will be 
designed in collaboration with the United Nations country team, emphasizing results-oriented 
communication to mobilize resources. The country office will make use of the capacities of 
UNDP regional and headquarters bureaux and collaborate with the Government to mobilize 
resources jointly. The country office will further explore partnerships with regional and 
international financial institutions, the private sector, multilateral and bilateral organizations, 
funding windows, emerging donors, foundations and the African Union to expand the 
programme portfolio.
36. Recognizing the limited donor landscape in Eritrea, the midterm evaluation of the 
country programme and regular tracking of the programme’s resource mobilization pipeline 
will provide evidence for needed adjustments. Implementation of the office’s financial 
sustainability plan will be monitored in line with Executive Board Decision 2013/9. UN joint 
programming instruments and UNDP costs incurred in implementing development activities 
will be charged to the relevant projects.IV. Monitoring and evaluation
37. In alignment with the UNSDCF monitoring and evaluation framework, UNDP will 
make investments to invigorate the contribution of the country programme to big data, 
national development and the Goals. The Ministry of Finance and National Development 
(MFND) and UNDP will co-lead selected working groups for the outcomes under this 
programme and will undertake more inclusive and gender-sensitive monitoring, assurance 
and progress reviews to inform evidence-based decision-making. Considering the paucity of 
data in the country, UNDP will support development of national capacity and efforts to 
produce quality country data and studies. 
38. Sources of information will include the Human Development Report and Goals reports; 
thematic studies on youth and employment and climatic change adaptation; and establishment 
of monitoring baselines for relevant Goals. UNDP will take an active role in the United 
Nations Monitoring and Evaluation Working Group in collaboration with multilateral and 
bilateral development partners. The aim will be to strengthen national monitoring and 
evaluation systems to gradually build up data collection and analysis. Indicators, baselines
and targets will be established that are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and timebased. Missing baseline data will be collected during the first quarter of 2022. Project 
evaluations in the evaluation plan meet all established criteria.
39. The UNDP Gender Marker will be used to improve planning and decision-making to 
ensure gender equality. At least 5 per cent of programme resources will be earmarked for 
monitoring, evaluation and assessments/research. Outcome-level monitoring, assurance and 
evaluation will be undertaken in partnership with other United Nations organizations and 
development partners. Performance will be tracked regularly; data and evidence will be 
analysed to inform decision-making.
40. Regular monitoring activities will take place, including periodic field visits, quarterly 
progress and financial reports, quarterly output progress reviews, joint annual reviews and 
bi-annual outcome progress reviews. The midterm review and independent country 
programme evaluation will be conducted to inform the contribution of the programme to 
development goals and outcomes, and to shape policy, strategies, programme design and 
implementation. The costed evaluation plan includes project and portfolio evaluations as well 
as the midterm review and the SCF terminal evaluation. The goal is to capture lessons learned 
in the course of the country programme and inform the next programme cycle.Annex. Results and resources framework for Eritrea (2022-2026)
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: To become a country where peace, justice, democracy and prosperity prevail. To eliminate hunger, poverty and illiteracy from Eritrea. For Eritrea to preserve 
its identity and uniqueness. UN Vision: A peaceful, prosperous, resilient, inclusive and socially just society by 2030.
1. SCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #1: By 2026, Eritrea’s public sector institutions are more accountable and efficient, and more people enjoy the right to development
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 1 – Accelerate structural transformations for sustainable development
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK 
OUTCOME INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S)
DATA SOURCE, 
FREQUENCY, 
RESPONSIBILITIES
INDICATIVE COUNTRY 
PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
MAJOR 
PARTNER/SHIPS
FRAMEWORKS
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($)
Indicator 1.1. Per cent of the population 
satisfied with their last experience of 
public services (Goal 16.6.2)
Baseline (2010): To be confirmed
(TBC)
Target (2023): > 50%
1.1 Indicator 1.2. Per cent of governance 
institutions perceived as of high 
integrity and performance (IIAG index)
Baseline (2019): 47.7%
Target (2026): 52%
• Data sources: Annual 
reports, National 
Statistics Office report
•
• Responsibility:
Ministries of Finance and 
National Development, 
Gender, Trade and 
Industry, Information and
Auditor General Office
Frequency: Annual
Output 1.1. Technical capacity of data-producing institutions increased to 
collect, manage, analyse, package and utilize data to improve learning, 
monitoring and evaluation and for decision-making
• Indicative indicator 1.1.1. Number of sectors with data collection/analysis 
mechanisms providing disaggregated (sex, age, disability) data to monitor 
progress towards Goals and other international frameworks with direct bearing 
on achievement of Goals, including financing-related data
Baseline (2010): 0; Target (year): 1
1.4 Indicator 1.1.2. Dollar value of all resources spent to strengthen statistical 
institutions (Goal 17.9.1)
Baseline (2018): $130,775; Target (2023): ≥ 262,000
• Indicative indicator 1.1.3. National accounts established, disaggregated (sex, 
age, disability) 
Baseline (2021): No; Target (2026): Yes
Output 1.2. Public institutions have strengthened processes and systems 
for equitable, efficient, effective and accountable service delivery
Indicator 1.2.1. Number of new functional systems/tools/procedures 
successfully developed/implemented for accountable service delivery
Baseline (2021): 1 – Automated System for Customs Data (ASYCUDA); 
Target (2026): 2 - ASYCUDA world
Indicator 1.2.2. Level of audit compliance with international standards 
Baseline (2021): 3; Target (2021-2026): 5 
Indicator 1.2.3. Per cent of ministry audits with performance-based assessment 
Baseline (2021): 30%; Target (2026): 45% 
Indicator 1.2.4: Level of awareness of Goals and civic participation in national 
development process 
Baseline (2021): low (2) Target (2026): adequate (5)
MFND, United 
Nations Population 
Fund (UNFPA), 
International Labour 
Organization (ILO), 
United Nations 
Economic 
Commission for 
Africa, European 
Union
Regular:
13,500,000
Other: 4,744,0001.2 Indicator 1.3. Per cent of the population 
reporting having personally felt 
discriminated against or harassed within 
the previous 12 months based on a form
of discrimination prohibited under 
international human rights law
 Baseline (2020): 0 (IIAG Index; TBC)
 Target (2023): > 25%
1.5 Indicator 1.4. Gender Equality Index 
(Goal 10.3.1) 
1.6 Baseline (2020): 34.7 (IIAG Index)
1.7 Target (2023): > 50.0
• Data sources; Ministry 
of Justice (MOJ), 
Universal Periodic 
Review report, National 
Union of Eritrean Women
•
• Responsibility: MOJ
Frequency: Annual & 
Biennial
Output 1.3. Justice and legislative institutions have technical and financial 
capacity to deliver inclusive, gender-responsive, accountable and equitable 
services including international commitments
Indicator 1.3.1. Implementation rate of frameworks and instruments (legal etc.) 
in place to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based violence at all levels 
(under-age marriage, female genital mutilation etc; Strategic Plan Indicator 
1.6.2.2). 
Baseline (2020): 6/100 (IIAG Index); Target >25/100
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of backlogged court cases heard
Baseline (2021): 3,415; Target (2026): 500
Indicative indicator 1.3.3: Existence of an operational and gender-responsive
case flow management information system.
Baseline (2021): No; Target (2026): Yes
Indicator 1.3.4. Per cent of accepted Universal Periodic Review 
recommendations implemented. 
Baseline (2021): 85.87%; Target (2026): 95%
Indicators 1.3.5: Number of CEDAW recommendations implemented. 
Baseline (2021): 0; Target (2026): 4
MOJ, UNFPA, 
United Nations 
Children’s Fund 
(UNICEF), United 
Nations High 
Commissioner for 
Human Rights
As above
2. SCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #2: By 2026, Eritreans, especially disadvantaged populations, have increased livelihoods as economic growth becomes more inclusive and diversified
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 2 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions 
2.1 Indicator 2.1. Per cent of population 
below the national and international 
poverty line, by sex, age, employment 
status and geographic location 
(urban/rural) (Goal 1.1.1, 1.1.2)
Baseline: TBC; Targets: TBC
2.2 Indicator 2.2. Unemployment rate by 
sex, age and persons with disability 
(Goal 8.5.2)
Baseline: 5.14 (Goals Index16 2020) 
Target: 0.5
2.3 Indicator 2.3. Per cent of productive 
areas under sustainable agriculture and 
marine resources (Goal 2.4.1)
Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC
Data sources: Sector 
ministry reports
Responsibility: 
Ministries of Finance and 
National Development, 
Agriculture, Marine 
Resources, Trade and 
Industry; National 
Confederation of Eritrean 
Workers; and others
Frequency: Annual 
Output 2.1. Capacity of public sector institutions strengthened to develop 
gender-responsive investment policies and strategies to support MSMEs 
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of gender-responsive investment policies and 
strategies developed and implemented at national and subnational levels. 
Baseline17 (2021): 2; Target (2026): 4
Output 2.2. Capacity of institutions and people strengthened to adopt and 
use integrated, new technologies and practices that support economic 
growth and livelihoods
• Indicator 2.2.1. Number of smallholders’ MSMEs supported with new
technology and financing solutions to enhance their livelihoods (Integrated 
results and resources framework: 1.1.2.2)
Baseline (2020): 0; Target: 200 (100 female-led)
•
• Indicator 2.2.2. Number of new decent jobs (formal and informal) generated,
disaggregated by sex (Goal 8.9.2)
Baseline: 604 (Country programme document terminal evaluation, 2020); 
Target: 10,000 (5,000 female, 5,000 male)
MFND, Ministries of 
Agriculture, Trade 
and, Industry, Marine 
Resources, Justice, 
Land, Water and 
Environment, Local 
Government; Office 
of Auditor General;
National 
Confederation of 
Eritrean Workers, 
National Union of 
Eritrean Youth and 
Students and National
Union of Eritrean 
Women 
Regular:
10,695,000
Other: 6,200,0002.4 Indicator 2.4. Average income of 
small-scale businesses, by sex and 
geographic area (SDG 2.3.2)
2.5 Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC
2.6
2.7 Indicator 2.5. Per cent of population 
covered by social protection 
floors/systems, by sex, distinguishing 
children, unemployed persons, older 
persons, persons with disabilities, 
pregnant women, newborns, workinjury victims and poor and vulnerable
people (Goal 1.3.1)
Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC
2.8
2.9 Indicator 2.6. National response rate to 
socioeconomic impact of COVID-19
Baseline: TBC; Target: TBC
As above
Output 2.3. Skills and capacity of people, especially those with disabilities, 
women and youth, enhanced to access diversified livelihoods and 
employability options
• Indicator 2.3.1. Number of vulnerable persons with disabilities, women and 
youth who acquire new skills for entrepreneurship development
Baseline: 3,617 (2019/2020 progress reports/country programme document
terminal evaluation 2020).
Target:10,000 (5,000 female, 5000 male)
Output 2.4. Technical and operational capacities of the Government and 
associations of MSMEs enhanced to develop inclusive value chains and 
market access in agriculture
•
• Indicator 2.4.1. Extent18 to which agricultural value chain systems are 
developed and functional. 
• Baseline (2020): 0; Target (2024): 3
Indicator 2.4.2. Number of strategies developed and implemented to access 
markets by MSMEs.
Baseline (2020): 0; Target (2023): 4
UNDP, United 
Nations Industrial 
Development 
Organization 
(UNIDO), UNICEF, 
UNFPA, FAO, ILO, 
UN-Women and 
others
As above
3. SCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP #3: By 2026, people in Eritrea have benefited from climate-resilient, sustainable environment and natural resources management
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Outcome 3 – Advance poverty eradication in all its forms and dimensions
3.1 Indicator 3.1. Per cent of population 
negatively impacted by natural and 
human-caused disasters
Baseline: TBC
Target: TBC
3.2 Indicator 3.2. Proportion of terrestrial, 
marine and inland resources conserved 
for biodiversity and ecosystem services 
by forest cover (Goal 15.1 and 15.2) 
Baseline: 13.34 (2018)
Target: > 25.00
Data sources: Sector 
ministry reports
Responsibility: 
Ministries of Finance and 
National Development, 
Land, Water and 
Environment, 
Agriculture, Trade and 
Industry
Frequency: Annually
Output 3.1 Capacity of national, subnational and community-level 
institutions is strengthened to sustainably manage and use biodiversity, 
environmental and natural resources and reduce disaster risks and their 
impacts
• Indicator 3.1.1: Coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas
Baseline (2021): 0 hectares; Target (2026): 880,000 hectares
• Indicator 3.1.2: Area under sustainable forest management
Baseline (2021): 574,000 hectares; Target (2026): 674,000 hectares
Output 3.2. Men, women and youth in rural areas are enabled to manage 
and utilize natural resources equitably and sustainably to improve 
livelihoods
•
• Indicator 3.2.1: Total number of additional men, women and youth of all ages 
benefiting from strengthened livelihoods through solutions for management of 
natural resources, ecosystems 
Baseline (2021): 152,280; Target (2026): 325,000 (equal proportions of male, 
female and youth)
•
MFND, Ministries of 
Agriculture, Trade 
and Industry, Marine 
Resources, 
Land, Water and 
Environment, Local 
Government;
National Union of 
Eritrean Youth and 
Students and National 
Union of Eritrean 
Women
Regular: 7,556,000 
Other: 21,500,000• Indicator 3.2.2: Per cent of women participating in local decision-making 
processes related to natural resources management (disaggregated by age and 
disability)
Baseline (2021): 10%; Target (2026): 30%
3.3 Indicator 3.3. Prevalent vulnerability 
and Risk Management Index (Red List 
Index)
Baseline: 0.893 
Target: 0.900 (TBC)
3.4 Indicator 3.4. Share of total energy 
consumption (renewable and nonrenewable) (Goal 7.3)
Baseline: 48.42 (2020)19
Target: > 60%
Data sources: Sector 
ministry reports, Human 
Development Report,
Goals reports
Responsibility: 
Ministries of Finance and 
National Development, 
Land, Water and 
Environment, 
Agriculture, Trade and 
Industry
Frequency: Annually
Output 3.3. Capacities of public institutions and communities are 
enhanced to mitigate, adapt to and mainstream climate change and 
disaster risks into development programmes
Indicator 3.3.1: Number of key public institutions with integrated climate 
adaptation and climate-related disaster risk reduction strategies and action plans
Baseline (2021): 0; Target (2026): 2 
Indicator 3.3.2: Number of key public institutions enabled to integrate 
mitigation, adaptation and disaster risk reduction into sector strategies and 
programmes 
Baseline (2021): 0; Target (2026): 2
Indicator 3.3.3: Number of communities with operational development plans 
that explicitly address climate-related hazards and disaster risk
Baseline (2021): 20; Target (2026):50
Indicator 3.3.4: Number of targeted communities that have operational and 
effective integrated water resources management systems in place
Baseline (2021): 30; Target (2026): 50
• Output 3.4. Access to modern, renewable and affordable clean energy 
sources and services increased
Indicator 3.4.1: Per cent of population with access to clean fuels and 
technology for cooking
Baseline: 16.32% (Goals 2020)
Target:> 50%
•
• Indicator 3.4.2: Per cent of population with access to electricity
Baseline (201620): 48.42%; Target (2026): >50%
UNDP, Global 
Environment Facility, 
FAO, IFAD, African 
Development Bank, 
UNIDO, UNICEF, 
UNFPA, FAO, ILO, 
UN-Women, United 
Nations Educational, 
Scientific and 
Cultural Organization
As above