File Name: AFG-NRER-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: Afghanistan
Country Code: AFG
Category: NRER
Document Title: RENEWABLE ENERGY ROADMAP FOR AFGHANISTAN RER2032
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2017
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2032
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

RENEWABLE ENERGY ROADMAP 
FOR AFGHANISTAN 
RER2032
This work is supported by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), under the project “TA-8808 
AFG: Renewable Energy Development in Afghanistan” (September 2015- June 2017). 
IT Power Consulting Private Limited
410, Ansal Tower
38, Nehru Place
New Delhi – 110019, INDIA
Tel: +91 (11) 4600-1191/ 92
Fax: +91 (11) 46001193
Web: http://www.itpower.co.in/ 
 
REPORT PREPARED BY ITP INDIA1
 
#FOREWORD
 
Energy access and energy security are two key requisites for the socio-economic growth 
of Afghan societies. Renewable energy resource with their enormous potential in 
Afghanistan, can successfully be harnessed to meet these two requirements. The 
development of renewable energy sector is thus a priority area for the Government of 
Afghanistan and all its supporting partners. 
An important pillar for the RE sector development is the engagement of the private 
sector and financing institutions. The Asian Development Bank through a Technical 
Assistance (TA) has addressed these challenges by way of developing the Roadmap for 
Renewable Energy in Afghanistan which is a strategic document aiming at meeting the 
objectives of the Afghanistan Renewable Energy Policy and the National Energy Supply 
Programme. The Roadmap is designed to increase the supply of energy from domestic 
resources; improve energy supply to load centers, provincial capitals, and rural 
population; and increase the capacity within the Government to plan and implement 
renewable energy projects. It includes prioritization of RE technologies and projects, 
designing appropriate business models for their implementation and identifying enablers 
for market development.
One of the important outcomes of this TA is the design and development of strategic 
and relevant projects which are trendsetters in their respective domains and their 
implementation will help in opening markets for different renewable energy 
technologies and applications in Afghanistan. These projects are - Daikundi mini-grid, 
Kabul roof-top solar, Hisar-E-Shahi industrial park solar project and Farah PV-wind-diesel 
hybrid project. 
I hope that this Roadmap will provide a confidence to the private sector in preparing to 
invest its resources in supporting the RE sector in Afghanistan.
Engineer Ali Ahmad Osmani
Minister of Energy and Water
#ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AC Alternating Current;
ADB Asian Development Bank;
AFG Afghanistan;
AISA Afghanistan Investment Support Agency;
ANDS Afghanistan National Development Strategy ;
AREU Afghanistan Renewable Energy Union;
ASERD Afghanistan Sustainable Energy for Rural Development;
ASHP Air Source Heat Pump ;
ATC Aggregate Technical & Commercial;
BMC Billing, Metering and Collection ;
BOOM Build-Own-Operate-Maintain;
CAPEX Capital Expenditure ;
CBO Community Based Organization ;
CCSAP Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan ;
CdTE Cadmium-telluride;
COAM Conservation Organisation for Afghan Mountain Areas;
COP Coefficient of Performance ;
CPSU Central Public-Sector Undertaking;
CPV Concentrating PV;
CSH Concentrating Solar Heat;
c-Si crystalline Silicon;
CSO Central Statistics Office ;
CSO Civil Society Organizations ;
CSP Concentrating Solar Power;
CTCN Climate Technology Centre and Network ;
DABS Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat ;
DC Direct Current;
DF Distribution Franchisee;
DNI Direct Normal Irradiance ;
DPR Detailed Project Report ;
DRE Decentralised Renewable Energy;
ECO Economic Cooperation Organization;
ERDA Energy for Rural Development in Afghanistan ;
ESCO Energy Service Companies ;
ESIA Environmental-Social Impacts Assessment ;
ETC Evacuated tube collectors;
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;
FiT Feed-in-Tariffs;
FPC Flat-plate collectors;
FPV Floating PV ;
GCF Green Climate Fund ;
GEF Global Environment Facility;
GHG Greenhouse Gas;
GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit ;
GoI Government of India;
GoIRA Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan ;
GW Gigawatt;
HPP Hydro Power Plant;
ICT Information and Communications Technology;
IDCOL Infrastructure Development Company Limited;
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contributions ;
IPP Independent Power Producer;
IREDA Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Limited;
IRENA International Renewable Energy Agency;
ISA International Solar Alliance;
kW Kilowatt;
kWh Kilowatt-hour;
LFR Linear Fresnel Reflector ;
MAIL Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock;
MEW Ministry of Energy and Water;
MFC Microbial Fuel Cells;
MFI Microfinance Institutions ;
MHPs Micro Hydropower Plants ;
MJ Multi-Junction;
MNRE Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (India);
MRRD Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development;
MW Megawatt;
MWh Megawatt-hour;
NAMA Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions;
NESP National Energy Supply Programme;
NGO Non-Governmental Organizations;
NISE National Institute of Solar Energy ;
NRVA National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment;
NSP National Solidary Program;
NZAID New Zealand Aid Programme;
O&M Operation and maintenance;
OPEX Operational Expenditure ;
PCU Power Control Unit;
PPA Power Purchase Agreement ;
PPP Public-Private-Partnership;
PSMP Power Sector Master Plan;
PTC Parabolic trough collector;
R&D Research and Development;
RAGA Rapid Assessment Gap Analysis;
RE Renewable Energy ;
RENP Afghanistan Renewable Energy Policy ;
RESCO Renewable Energy Service Company ;
RETs Renewable Energy Technologies ;
SAARC South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation;
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals ;
SE4ALL Sustainable Energy for All;
SECI Solar Energy Corporation of India ;
SHS Solar Home Systems;
SHWs Solar Hot Water System;
SPEED Smart Power for Environmentally-sound Economic Development ;
SPPD Solar Power Park Developer ;
SPPs Solar Power Park;
SPV Solar Photovoltaics;
SREP Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program;
SS Standalone Systems;
T&D Transmission and Distribution 
TES Thermal Energy Storage ;
TPL Torrent Power Limited ;
TWh Terawatt-hours;
VAM Vapor Absorption Machine;
#THE ROADMAP 
The Renewable Energy Roadmap for Afghanistan is developed to realize the vision and intent 
of the Renewable Energy Policy (RENP) for Afghanistan that sets a target of deploying 4500 
– 5000 MW of renewable energy (RE) capacity by 2032 and envisions a transition from donor 
grant-funded RE projects to a fully-private sector led industry by 2032. 
Objectives and scope
The objectives of the Roadmap are three-fold:
1. To increase the supply of energy by domestic resources 
2. To augment energy services to population and load centres that are either not served 
or are poorly served 
3. To enhance energy access to remote rural population for their livelihood needs 
The scope of the Roadmap includes an estimation of technology specific achievable targets 
based on RE potential that has already been mapped and segregated region-wise. 
Technologies utilizing solar, wind, biomass, hydro and geothermal resources are considered
for this purpose. The Roadmap comprises of prioritization of technologies and projects, 
designing appropriate business models for their implementation and identifying enablers for 
market development using a Stage-Gate analysis approach.
The Roadmap also estimates costs for achieving the RE generation targets based on the 
international/ regional costs and experiences from implementing RE projects in Afghanistan. 
Further, it proposes applicable sources of funds for development of RE sector. 
An essential component of the Roadmap is the institutional arrangement for its 
implementation and enhancing the capacities of various stakeholders through training on 
knowledge products particularly the project selection and decision-making tool and system 
optimization models.
#Methodological framework and presentation of Roadmap
The framework and approach for RE Roadmap rests on four pillars- an assessment of RE 
resource potential and its deployment through various technologies and projects; 
appropriate markets and business models for using these technologies; enablers (both policy 
and market related) that are required to implement the appropriate business models; and 
estimation of system costs in Afghanistan for financing of the Roadmap.
#Technologies and systems
1. The available RE resources in Afghanistan and their technical potential include solar, 
wind, hydro (small, mini and micro), biomass (including waste-to-energy) and 
geothermal. These resources can be harnessed through a variety of technologies and 
systems addressing electrical and thermal energy needs. The systems are categorized 
as utility scale, mini-grids and off-grid/ stand- alone which also represent the RE 
market segments in Afghanistan. Some of these technologies and systems include MW 
scale solar PV (both flat plate and concentrating); roof-top and stand-alone PV 
systems; concentrating solar thermal for power generation and for low grade process 
heat applications; wind farms and stand-alone wind-electric generators; small hydro 
power projects; mini-grids and biogas digesters.
2. The process for developing project pipeline follows a 3–level decision process:
a. Level 1 assesses the possibility of utility scale RE projects on the basis of good 
quality RE resource, availability of national grid for power evacuation, road 
connectivity and overall security situation. If not satisfied, it points at options 
of mini-grids and off-grid stand-alone systems.
b. Level 2 assesses the viability of setting up either RE/ hybrid mini-grids or 
stand-alone systems on the basis of population concentration, nature of loads
(i.e. domestic, institutional, enterprises, anchor loads such as telecom 
towers), and operational diesel mini-grids that can be hybridised or replaced 
with RE. 
c. Level 3 assesses the feasibility of specific projects on the basis of primary 
energy surveys, topographical studies, environmental and social impact 
assessment (if required), community engagement activities, stakeholder 
consultations etc. 11
The decision process evolves into a flow-chart and is presented as the decision 
tool to develop RE project pipeline for Afghanistan.
#Markets and business models
3. Further, for each of the market segments (i.e. utility scale, mini-grids, off-grid/ 
stand-alone), the Roadmap recommends business models that identify the roles of 
the government, DABS, private sector (already present and likely to be present), MFIs, 
NGOs and communities. Regional and international best practices have been studied 
and customized for designing the businesses models for Afghanistan. Solar Power 
Parks, solar roof-top with net-metering, RESCO (Renewable Energy Service Company) 
and microfinance aided sale of stand-alone devices (i.e. Pay-As-You-Go) are some of 
the business models selected for RE projects in Afghanistan.
#Ecosystem enablers
4. The Roadmap uses a Stage-Gate model to discuss the enablers that are required for 
development of RE markets across several technologies and business models. Market 
development is expected to commence with the introduction of policies and 
guidelines for specific technologies and business models, such as the feed-in tariffs, 
and net-metering policy. Implementation of model projects across technologies as 
public – private – partnership (PPP) projects, will further develop this sector. This 
initial stage is termed as Market Seeding.
5. With favourable policies and an enabling business environment, commercial-scale 
projects may be implemented, moving the market from seeding to Market Creation 
stage. The first few commercial projects, led by the private sector, will comprise 
low-risk options where risks and gains are shared across the government, private 
sector and beneficiary communities. The subsequent stage is that of Market 
Transformation where technologies and markets are mainstreamed within the overall 
energy sector. 
#Costing and financing
6. The costs for applicable RE technologies and projects in Afghanistan have been 
collected through primary research by directly consulting with project developers, 
mainly members of Afghanistan Renewable Energy Union (AREU) and a few NGOs and 
donors. These costs are compared with regional and international costs to understand 
and then benchmark RE costs for Afghanistan. 
7. The above exercise helps in estimating the financing requirements for the Roadmap
and suggesting enablers that can help in reducing the costs in future. An analysis of 
various available mechanisms- globally, regionally and locally- is undertaken to 
recommend possible ways to finance the Roadmap.
#Implementation arrangement
8. It is important to recognize the hierarchy of this document (the Roadmap) within the 
renewable energy development planning process. The RENP sets the vision and goals 
for RE development in Afghanistan and the Roadmap develops a strategy for achieving 
these goals. The next logical step is to implement the strategy laid out in the 
Roadmap by carrying out activities and initiatives and monitoring their progress with 
the help of a tracking system. A brief discussion on the implementation arrangement
with focus on institutional structure, skill enhancements and training is also included 
in this document.
#Presentation of Roadmap
The Roadmap is presented in eight chapters. It maps the RE resource potential across 
different regions; selects appropriate and viable RE technologies; identifies applications and 
categorises markets for selected RE technologies; develops project pipeline for identified 
markets and designs suitable business models for each market category. This analysis is based 
on the Decision Tool, specifically developed for this purpose and applied across Afghanistan.
Subsequently, the Roadmap focuses on enablers and actions required for achieving the 
targets and milestones using the Stage-Gate model customised for market categories and 
business models. The enablers are analysed across technical, financial, regulatory and 
institutional landscape, as applicable to Afghanistan. Further, the analysis also includes 
estimation of costs for various technologies in Afghanistan. The outcome of this analysis are 
the financial requirements and financing modalities; regulatory & institutional framework 
for setting up business models; assessment and planning for institutional capacities and 
evaluation of overall impacts of implementing the Roadmap. 
#1 INTRODUCTION
#1.1 Rationale
Renewable energy sector development is one of the priority areas for the Government of 
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) for immediate purpose of providing access to 
modern energy to remote and rural population and for medium to long term purpose of 
providing energy security to the country. Afghanistan is rich in energy resources, both fossil 
fuel based and renewables. However, it still depends heavily on imported electricity and 
fuels and has one of the lowest per capita consumption of electricity in the world. Lack of 
domestic generation remains the key challenge for energy security and energy access in 
Afghanistan. Its 30% electrification rate ranks it in the lowest 5% in per capita energy 
consumption globally. Out of the total 519 MW installed capacity, 51% is thermal (diesel and 
furnace oil) with a generation cost of $0.25-0.35 per kWh, which is four times that of 
imported electricity. The remaining 49% (254 MW) is from hydropower, which is seasonal 
and has a capacity factor of less than 40%. Over 80% of total electricity supply is imported1. 
The Roadmap for renewable energy for Afghanistan identifies pathways for reaching about 
5,000 MW of renewable energy based generation capacity by 2032, in line with the 
Afghanistan Renewable Energy Policy targets and vision. It provides an inclusive, medium to 
long-term vision of the renewable energy sector, taking into cognizance inter-dependencies 
between energy, environment and overall socio-economic development. It also provides a 
‘portfolio approach’, integrating technologies and market structures that are based on 
viable business models and finance options. 
#1.2 Contextual analysis 
The foundation of the RE development is based on the Afghanistan National Development 
Strategy (ANDS, 2008) which provides the overall vision and goals of the energy sector; 
Power Sector Master Plan, (PSMP, 2013) that provides the overall status and priorities of 
power sector network planning and expansion, including identification of regions where 
network expansion in not economically viable; and the National Energy Supply Program, 
(NESP, 2013). The NESP has set the short-term (by 2015) and long-term (up to 2022) targets 
for electricity supply, energy efficiency and renewable energy sector, energy institutions 
and private sector participation, as well as capacity and regulatory framework 
development. Recently approved Renewable Energy Policy (RENP, 2015), as an overarching 
policy instrument, has set ambitious targets for RE development in the country. The 
Afghanistan Integrated Energy Policy is proposing to put the RE sector development as one 
of its strategic intents. 
The above is broadly in sync with the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) target for energy 
access for all by 2030, which is developed as a country level plan of action to ensure access 
to energy for all. Development of renewable energy is also one of the priority areas for low 
emission development for Afghanistan (NAMA, 2015) particularly in the context of energy 
access to rural communities to think and act beyond lighting energy.
The Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan for Afghanistan (CCSAP, 2015) targets 100 
percent electricity coverage by 2100 as mandated within the National Priority Programs. It 
further targets at least 40 percent share of renewable energy in the Afghanistan national 
grid by 2100, with an increased presence of decentralised renewable energy based systems 
to cater to off-grid areas. Subsequently, the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions 
(INDC) have identified access to renewable energy for 25% of rural population as the goal.
Many donors and international organisations are supporting the development of renewable 
energy sector in Afghanistan. The Asian Development Bank, GIZ, DFID, Islamic Development 
Bank are among a few. 
According to the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW), about 5100 RE Projects have been 
jointly implemented/ under implementation by MEW/MRRD/DABS and other developers, the 
installed capacity of the mentioned projects is 55 MW. MEW has recently invited 
private sector to invest in 30 RE projects totalling upto 100 MW and comprising biogas, solar, 
wind, hydro and hybrid technology options. 
Projects Total
Total No of Renewable Energy Projects Completed 4,602;
Total No of Renewable Energy Projects Planned 99;
Total No of Renewable Energy Projects Under Construction 493;
Total Capacity of Renewable Energy Projects (no.) 5,911;
Total Capacity of Renewable Energy Projects Completed and (kW) 55,011;
Biomass Total number 44 Capacity (kW) 0;
MHP Total number 2,678 Capacity (kW) 52,913;
Solar Total number 2,450 Capacity (kW) 1,868;
Wind Total number 22 Capacity (kW) 230;
Total Total number 5,194 Capacity (kW) 55,01116;
#1.3 Business environment and industrial landscape
The renewable energy industry in Afghanistan is in infancy. The AREU is a newly formed 
body with about 45 members and consist of equipment manufacturers and system 
integrators. The status of financial sector remains a constraint for private sector 
development and limited access to credit is limiting the growth and involvement of local RE 
industry in rural and renewable energy sector. The business environment is characterised 
by grant based delivery models. Private sector engagement in the RE market is still weak 
and unsystematic. 
The tariff regime is largely dominated by Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS), the 
national utility. DABS operates on a cost-plus pricing basis. As a result, tariff rates can be 
high, and they often are. The weighted average tariff in 2014 was Afs 7.3 (0.11 $) per kWh. 
Commercial customers of DABS almost everywhere pay around 8-10 Afs (0.15 $) per kWh. 
Further, DABS finances are affected by foreign exchange movements; since imported power 
is purchased in USD while local revenues are in AFN. Increasing the proportion of supply 
from domestic sources is one lever to manage this risk.
#1.4 Renewable and rural energy programs and key outcomes
The renewable energy landscape in Afghanistan is dominated by hydropower and solar PV 
technologies. National Solidarity Program (NSP)/ NABDP and Energy for Rural Development 
in Afghanistan (ERDA) within NABDP, have been the flagship programs of MRRD for rural 
energization.
In addition to MRRD, DABS also carries out grid extensions to rural areas under the NESP of 
MEW. Apart from the MRRD and MEW programmes, there are efforts by FAO, NZAID and GiZ
at a smaller scale which are also supporting village electrification. There are also smallscale efforts by NGOs such as COAM and Geres targeting thermal energy issues. However,
the thermal energy needs are not being addressed in any significant scale by existing 
programmes and there has not been much penetration of energy efficient devices. 
Dependence on fuel wood and other non-renewable biomass is very high and indoor air 
pollution and resultant lower respiratory illnesses is the biggest cause of pre-mature deaths 
in Afghanistan.
Along with hydropower, solar home systems have also proliferated across the country. The 
main reasons behind solar PV’s popularity are its affordability and portability, due to its 
highly scalable and modular structure. However, as on date the renewable energy landscape 
is dominated by smaller systems, catering mostly to lighting and household level demand. 
Some experience has been generated recently on the use of solar PV pumps both for drinking 
water and for irrigation by the MRRD’s National Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Irrigation
Programme (Ru-WatSIP), and also on large scale (between 500 kWp to 1 MWp) of solar PV 
based mini-grids.
The rural electrification efforts supported by the international community has led to key 
learning including:
• There is a need to go beyond household electrification for lighting by addressing 
household thermal energy needs and engaging anchor customers for productive 
use in the commercial sector and public service opportunities in rural 
government institutions. Monthly expenditure on solid fuels during winter 
months is considered to be 10 times higher than the spend on kerosene for 
lighting.;
• There is a need for integrated planning for energy projects along with 
infrastructure projects that will get direct benefits from reliable energy and 
vice-versa. For instance, planning for agriculture based livelihoods projects (i.e. 
cold-storages) should include a component of energy provision and likewise 
planning for energy projects (i.e. MHP) should identify and support enterprises 
and public institutions that will use the electricity thus generated.;
• The mini-grid systems are infrastructure projects and hence require standard 
approaches of engineering services, project planning and operational 
management. All the projects should be planned and implemented in a coherent 
manner using standard guidelines and practices. In this regard, internationally 
accepted forms of contract, contract management and engineering supervision 
should be used.;
• New technologies and technology innovation must be tracked by the planning 
and engineering teams and integrated within the overall framework of electricity 
service provision. Further, system planning and optimisation tools for maximising 
the benefits of hybrid configurations for generation from renewable energy and 
distributed generation topologies must be used.;
• A common and accepted understanding of the roles and responsibilities in the 
ownership, operation and management, maintenance, payment for services, 
regulation, funding and financing, etc. are critical and should be achieved.;
• Financing model of almost all the cost of the installation and maintenance with 
donor funding is not sustainable, collecting fee-for-services from the consumers 
is important for O&M of the plant.;
• It will be important to create rural energy service delivery models that engage 
the private sector and financial institutions and leverage donor and government 
sources to create scalable and replicable models.;
• There is a need to include gender perspective in the planning and 
implementation of rural energy projects and gender mainstreaming should be an 
integral component of any policy and planning framework.;
#1.5 Relevance of mapping the road to RE development 
Mapping the road to RE development (The Roadmap), is important not only for meeting the 
internal objectives of energy access and energy security, but also to keep Afghanistan 
aligned with international initiatives on climate change adaptation and mitigation; 
sustainable development goals, and regional energy trade. At the macro level, the Roadmap 
shall contribute to achievement of sustainable development goals (SDGs), especially towards 
reduction of poverty (SDG 1), affordable and clean energy (SDG 7) and industry, innovation 
and infrastructure (SDG 9). It also addresses concerns in good health and wellbeing (SDG 3) 
and quality education (SDG 4) through provision of energy security for better service delivery 
in social sectors. Consistency with climate action (SDG 13) is maintained by linking the 
Roadmap’s broad vision and outputs with key national climate policy documents such as the 
Afghanistan CCSAP and INDC.
Following figure highlights the relevance of the Roadmap.
#Prospects
• Only 30% energy access in rural areas and 
65% in urban;
• Estimates suggest 222 GW of solar, 66 GW 
of wind and 23GW of hydro potential;
• Role of RE recognized for energy access, 
energy security, SDGs and climate 
resilient development ;
#Situation
• Forward looking and conducive policy 
regime;
• RED (MEW), a dedicated department to 
develop RE sector;
• Donors support to further the sector;
• Private sector taking interest;
#Requirements
• Efficient and effective regulatory and 
policy landscape to attract private sector;
• Regulatory and policy landscape to be 
efficient and effective for private sector 
to participate in RE development;
• Strong pipeline for economically 
sustainable and financially viable projects ;
• Local industry to be strengthened to 
support the implementation of RE 
projects;
• Synergistic approach by donors and other 
developmental partners ;
• Institutions absorptive to the capacity 
building and strengthening initiatives;
#Obstacles
• Internal security, particularly for 
international companies and experts ;
• Safety and connectivity related issues for 
travels to remote areas;
• Availability of trained personnel ;
• Lack of funds and financing;
#2 TECHNOLOGIES AND MARKETS
#2.1 From vision to targets 
The vision of this Roadmap is to guide policy makers, the private sector, developers and
other key stakeholders in shaping the renewable energy sector in Afghanistan. As discussed, 
the target for 2032 is to achieve around 5,000 MW of RE capacity to be realised as the RE 
market traverses three stages- Seeding, Creation and Transformation. The process for 
achieving these targets starts with an assessment of applicable and appropriate RE 
technologies for Afghanistan on the basis of a) RE resource potential, b) techno-commercial 
status at global level and c) appropriate system designs and configuration for various 
applications and markets.
#2.2 Renewable energy outlook for Afghanistan
#2.2.1 RE resource potential
Afghanistan’s renewable energy potential is estimated to be over 300,000 MW6, consisting 
of solar (222,849 MW), wind (66,726 MW), hydro (23,310 MW) and biomass (4,000 MW). 
Geothermal needs more detailed assessments to ascertain realizable potential.
Appropriate technologies for harnessing the above RE resources are briefly discussed below.
#2.2.2. Technologies and markets
The RE resource potential available in Afghanistan can be harnessed using various 
technologies, some of them are already available and used in Afghanistan, while some others 
are yet to be introduced. These RE technologies can be configured into different types of 
systems suitable for specific applications and markets. 
The RENP has identified three main categories of applications and markets that require the 
use of RE technologies and systems. These are:
• Utility scale (MW and above) essentially grid-connected to increase the domestic 
supply into the energy generation mix of the country;
• Mini-grids for serving the load centers and population clusters for enhancing the 
livelihoods;
• Stand-alone for servicing the basic and productive needs to off-grid communities;
#2.3 Description of RE technologies and systems
#2.3.1 Solar photovoltaics (PV) 
Afghanistan has a good solar resource that can be harnessed for electricity generation and 
for thermal applications. The country enjoys particularly long sunny days with high 
irradiation, ranging from 4.5 - 7 kWh/m²/day. 
Technologies that convert solar energy into electric energy and usable heat are classified
into two types: Solar Photovoltaic (PV) and Solar Thermal technologies respectively. Solar 
PV is one of the most advanced and universally applicable RE technologies that also boasts 
of a fastest growth curve in the recent years. Global installed capacity for Solar PV stands 
at 303 GWp, of which, the largest capacity exists in China, followed by Japan and Germany. 
#Basis description of solar PV technology
Solar cells, the building block of PV system, convert sunlight directly into DC electricity. 
These are categorized based on materials they are made of, such as wafer-based crystalline 
silicon (c-Si) (either mono-crystalline or multi-crystalline silicon) and thin-films using 
amorphous Si (a-Si/ c-Si), cadmium-telluride (CdTe) and copper-indium-gallium-selenide 
(CIGS). Figure 5 gives the current market share of PV technologies as per year 2015.
Solar cells are assembled and electrically interconnected to form solar PV modules. In a cSi PV module, slices (wafers) of solar-grade (high purity) silicon are made into cells that are 
assembled into modules and electrically connected. Thin film PV modules consist of thin 
layers of semiconductor material deposited onto inexpensive, large-size substrates such as 
glass, polymer or metal. Several solar PV modules are connected in series and/ or in parallel 
to increase voltage and/or current, respectively. An inverter is needed to convert direct 
current (DC) into alternating current (AC) for grid integration and use with most electrical 
appliances. Solar PV Modules and balance of system (i.e. inverter, mounting structures, 
power control unit (PCU), cabling and batteries, if any) form a modular PV system with a 
capacity ranging from picowatts to gigawatts.
#System configurations
Solar PV systems are used to generate electricity for both grid-connected and off -grid 
applications, such as residential and commercial buildings, industrial facilities, remote and 
rural areas and large power plants.
Based on the system configurations, grid connectivity and system portability, solar PV 
systems are generally categorized mainly into 4 types:
• Utility scale ;
• Roof-top (which can be both grid connected and stand-alone);
• Mini-grids ;
• Stand-alone ;
The choice of solar PV technology for installation is often based on a trade-off between 
investment cost, module efficiency and electricity tariff. Thin film solar PV technology is 
generally cheaper, though significantly less efficient and requires substantially more surface 
area for the same power output than c-Si-based systems. Conversion efficiencies of 
commercially available PV modules are given in Table 4.
#I. Utility scale PV systems
Utility scale solar PV systems are typically in MW range and are generally ground-mounted. 
These are deployed either as Independent Power Projects (IPPs) or in Solar Power Parks 
(SPPs). Electricity generated from these projects is evacuated through the national (or 
private, as the case may be) transmission network.
#II. Roof-top solar PV systems
Roof-top solar PV is a modular, grid-connected or standalone system that has electricity 
generating solar panels mounted on the roof of any building. By virtue of being mounted on 
a roof, these systems are small compared to ground mounted solar PV stations that could 
be in the MW range. Typically, solar PV roof-top systems range from 1 kW and upto 100 kW 
in terms of installed capacity.
#III. Solar PV mini-grids 
Solar PV mini-grids have their own generation source (solar) and a local distribution grid. 
These are an ideal alternative to grid electricity in areas (such as remote villages) that do 
not have grid connectivity. Mini-grids also provide more reliable electricity, as any power 
cuts or interruptions to electricity supply can be quickly identified and corrected. 
Additionally, having the site of power generation closer to the load also reduces transmission 
and distribution (T&D) losses associated with centralised generation.
In most cases, solar PV mini-grids are either hybridized with other RE sources (i.e. wind) or 
with diesel and are backed up with batteries to increase the reliability and supply of 
electricity, particularly in case where electricity is required for after sun-shine hours. 
Typical sizes of mini-grids are from 10 kW to 1 MW. Figure 7 shows a typical solar mini-grid 
system.
#IV. Stand-alone solar PV systems
Stand-alone solar PV systems have many different applications across different sectors such 
as lighting, pumping and battery charging. The most popular stand-alone solar PV systems 
are:
1. Solar lanterns
2. Solar home systems (SHS)
3. Solar streetlights
4. Solar battery charging systems
5. Solar power packs (defence, telecommunication, etc.)
6. Solar pumps
In addition to the above proven system configurations, there are some new and emerging 
concepts which are worth mentioning here. These are the floating PV installations on static 
water bodies (such as lakes and reservoirs), canal-top PV systems, and concentrating PV.
#V. Floating solar systems
Floating PV systems are installed over the surface of stationary water bodies such as 
reservoirs, lakes and ponds to generate electricity. It allows efficient use of the water body 
by reducing evaporation of water and improved 
yield from solar PV panels due to lowered 
ambient temperatures. These installations are 
particularly useful when availability of land is a 
constraint. However, there are some challenges 
which need to be overcome before this concept 
can become a techno-commercial viable 
application. These are related to design and 
materials of float, including the anchoring,
impact on aquatic flora and fauna and social 
impacts on fishermen, local communities etc.
#VI. Canal-top PV systems
Canal-top PV systems are installed across the 
canals and water channels. It allows efficient use 
of the canals by reducing evaporation of water. 
The capacity of canal-top PV systems may vary 
from small-scale (kW-sized) to larger-scale (MWsized) installations. Although similar in capacity to 
ground mounted systems, this system varies 
significantly because of the need of a longer, 
wider and stronger mounting structure to support 
its installation over the width of the canal.
#VII. Concentrating photovoltaic (CPV) systems
CPV uses lenses and curved mirrors to focus sunlight onto small, but highly efficient, multijunction (MJ) solar cells. In addition, CPV systems often use solar trackers and sometimes a 
cooling system to further increase their efficiency. Ongoing research and development 
(R&D) is rapidly improving their competitiveness in the utility-scale segment and in areas of 
high insolation.
#Global status and outlook
Global Solar PV installations at the end of 2016 stand at 303 GWp, contributed both by 
industrialized and developing countries. The size and number of large-scale power plants 
continue to grow globally. During early 2016, at least 120 (70 in the previous year) solar PV 
plants of sizes 50 MW and larger were operating in 23 countries. Increase in market for solar 
PV is due to its increasing competitiveness, new government programmes, rising demand for
electricity and increased awareness of solar PV’s potential as countries seek to reduce 
pollution and CO2 emissions. 
Until 2014, developed countries (namely Germany, Italy and Japan) dominated investment 
in solar. In 2015, developing countries such as China, India, Chile, South Africa and a few 
others increased the level of deployment of both utility and small-scale investment in solar 
PV. Solar power (both solar PV and thermal) investment in 2016 in developed countries was 
USD 56.2 billion, compared to USD 57.5 billion in developing and emerging economies.
#Status and relevance in Afghanistan
As per IRENA, a cumulative capacity of 1MW has been installed in Afghanistan by 2016. The 
largest one is 1MW solar PV off grid system, which is installed in Bamyan province, supported 
by New Zealand Government. Some other important installations are: a 250KW solar PV offgird system installed near the Kabul airport by the Japan Embassy, a 100kW solar PV offgrid system installed in Gardiz province, many roof-top solar PV systems through NSP in 
remote areas & villages and a number of standalone systems. Majority of these are installed 
through donor driven programmes. 
Solar PV systems have a significant role to play in overall development of electricity sector 
in Afghanistan on account of the following:
• Majority of the population in remote areas doesn’t have access to electricity and offgrid solar PV systems are a viable option where population is dispersed and scattered 
over a wide area;
• Demand for electricity for irrigation is currently met through DG systems, which can 
be replaced by solar water pumping systems ;
• Utility scale solar PV projects can contribute to generation at the national level; 
• Solar PV systems are useful and applicable for nomads (Kuchi people);
#2.3.2 Solar thermal
Solar thermal systems convert solar radiation into heat. These systems are used to raise the 
temperature of a heat transfer fluid which can be air, water or a specially designed fluid. 
The heated fluid can then be used directly for hot water needs or space heating/cooling 
needs, or a heat exchanger can be used to transfer the thermal energy to the final 
application. The heat generated can also be stored in a storage tank for use in the hours 
when the sun is not available.
Solar thermal systems find various applications such as electricity generation, water 
heating, space heating/ cooling, industrial process heating, electricity generation etc. Solar 
thermal technologies can be divided into two broad categories: non-concentrating and 
concentrating.
#Non-concentrating solar thermal technologies
Solar thermal technologies in which sunlight is directly absorbed and is not concentrated, 
are called non-concentrating solar thermal technologies. They work on the principle of 
exposing a dark surface to solar radiation so that the radiation is absorbed. Nonconcentrating collectors absorb both direct and diffuse radiation. The absorbed radiation is 
then transferred to a fluid, like air or water. There are two main types of non-concentrating 
solar thermal collectors: flat-plate collectors and evacuated tube collectors.
#I. Flat-plate collectors (FPC)
FPC system consists of tubes carrying a fluid running through an insulated, weather-proof 
box with a dark absorber material and thermal insulation material on the backside that also 
prevents heat loss. FPC systems are typically used for heating swimming pools and other 
low-temperature applications.
#II. Evacuated tube collectors(ETC)
ETC system use parallel rows of glass tubes, each of which contains either a heat pipe or 
another type of absorber, surrounded by a vacuum. This greatly reduces heat loss, 
particularly in cold climates. ETC systems are typically used in solar water heating systems 
(SWHs). 
#Concentrating solar thermal technologies
Concentrating solar thermal technologies use mirrors to concentrate sunlight and produce 
heat and steam to generate electricity via a conventional thermodynamic cycle. Unlike solar 
PV, concentrating solar thermal uses only the Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI) and provides 
heat and power only in regions with high DNI. Concentrating solar thermal systems can be 
equipped with a heat storage system to use heat energy even under cloudy skies or after 
sunset. Concentrating solar thermal systems used to generate electricity as an outcome are 
known as Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) systems and those used to generate heat as an 
outcome are known as Concentrating Solar Heat (CSH) systems.
There are four main concentrating solar thermal system configurations, that are 
commercially available:
#I. Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR) system
Linear Fresnel Reflector (LFR) systems use a series of ground-based, flat or slightly curved 
mirrors placed at different angles to concentrate the sunlight onto a fixed receiver located 
several meters above the mirror field.
#II. Parabolic trough collector (PTC) 
Parabolic trough systems consist of parabolic mirrors that concentrate the sun’s rays on heat 
receivers (i.e. steel tubes) placed on the focal line. Receivers have a special coating to 
maximize energy absorption and minimize infrared re-irradiation and work in an evacuated 
glass envelope to avoid convection heat losses.
The solar heat is removed by a heat transfer fluid (e.g. synthetic oil, molten salt) flowing 
in the receiver tube and transferred to a steam generator to produce the super-heated 
steam that runs the turbine. Mirrors and receivers (i.e. the solar collectors) track the sun’s 
path along a single axis (usually East to West). Parabolic troughs are desirable for certain 
industrial and commercial needs to provide large amounts of hot water and/or for producing 
electricity by running steam turbines. 
#III. Parabolic dish system
Parabolic dish systems consist of a parabolic dish shaped concentrator (like a satellite dish) 
that reflects sunlight into a receiver placed at the focal point of the dish. The receiver may 
be a Stirling engine (i.e. kinematic and free-piston variants) or a micro-turbine. Parabolic 
dish systems require two-axis sun tracking systems and offer very high concentration factors 
and operating temperatures. The main advantages of parabolic dish systems include high 
efficiency (i.e. up to 30%) and modularity, which is suitable for distributed generation. 
#IV. Central receiver tower system
A central receiver tower system consists of a large number of mirrors (heliostats) that track 
the sun individually over two axes and focuses on the central tower where the solar heat 
drives a thermodynamic cycle and generates electricity. The heat transfer medium used for 
most modern type solar towers includes water/steam, molten salts, liquid sodium, oil and 
even air. The sunlight from many mirror-like dish reflectors spread over a large area is 
focused to one central point achieving an extremely high temperature which is used to 
produce high pressure steam which is then used to generate electricity.
In addition to renewable heat and power generation, concentrating solar technologies have 
other economically viable and sustainable applications, such as co-generation for domestic 
and industrial heat use, water desalination and enhanced oil recovery in mature and heavy 
oil fields.
#Global status and outlook
Solar thermal market is less established as compared to solar PV though its applications are 
vast and varied, particularly in developing countries’ context. Total concentrating solar 
power installed capacity has reached 4.8 GW at the end of 2016 with a further 11 GW in 
pipeline. Globally, costs for solar thermal technologies are declining, several new 
technologies are under development, and thermal energy storage (TES) is becoming 
increasingly important and remains the focus of extensive research and development. CSP 
is gathering increased policy support in nations with limited oil/gas reserves, constrained 
power networks or strong agenda for industrialization and job creation.
#Status and relevance in Afghanistan
The largest solar thermal system (20m3/day) has been installed in Kabul University’s 
women’s dormitory funded by the World Bank. Some other small solar thermal systems 
(domestic and large scale) are installed in the schools, dormitories, children garden and 
military bases since 1980.
Different types of solar thermal systems are manufactured in the country, like solar 
concentrated system for cooking, flat plate hot water system among others. Currently, 
advance solar hot water system (SHWS) are imported from China and India and are being 
used in the houses and for commercial purposes. Small and large scale of solar driers are 
made and used in agriculture sector. 
There is a huge potential of solar thermal systems such as SHWS, which can be utilized in 
domestic sector, schools and mosques. Solar dryers can increase the quality of the local 
products in the agriculture sector. Local fabrication of the components can help create jobs 
and utilize locally manufactured materials. Solar cookers can be useful and applicable for 
rural communities and nomads.
#Solar Thermal-LPG Hybrid Smart Cooking
Solar Thermal- LPG Hybrid Smart Cooking system 
has been commissioned at NTPC- Dadri, India 
which has been hybridized with Concentrating 
Solar Thermal M90 Dishes and efficient LPG Fired 
Burner. During day time (sunny hours) the system 
uses concentrating solar heat from M90 dishes for 
cooking, and during non-sunny periods, the LPG 
Fired burner automatically fires up, to provide 
completely automated-uninterrupted heat to the 
kitchen for cooking. Solar Thermal M90 Dishes at 
NTPC bear low running cost, the payback period is 
less than four years.
Configuration of Concentrating Solar M90 Dishes at 
NTPC- Dadri, India:
Peak Capacity at STC 80,000 kcal/hr.;
Application Cooking (Baking, Boiling and Frying);
System Configuration Hot Thermic Oil at 220°C;
Integration Hybridized with LPG Thermic Oil Heater;
Peak Capacity at STC 80,000 kcal/hr.;
Total Concentrator Area 2 Nos. of M90 Dishes totaling 180 m2;
#Solar–Biomass Hybrid Cold Storage-cum-Power Generation system for Rural Applications
A new concept whereby available biomass and 
solar resource could be used to operate a small, 
decentralized cold storage right at the village 
level is implemented in National Institute of Solar 
Energy (NISE), India and is now operational. In 
addition to providing the cold storage facility to 
the farmers, such a system could also supply gridquality power to the village; thereby offering a 
holistic solution to some of the key problems 
facing agrarian population. 
The system, comprises a 15 kW (~5 TR) vapor 
absorption machine (VAM) coupled with a 50 kWe 
biomass gasifier system and a field of solar 
concentrating collectors. The biomass gasifier produces synthesis gas using locally 
available woody biomass, which is then used to run an engine-generator to produce 
electricity. The waste heat from the biomass gasifier along with the heat energy from the 
solar concentrating collectors is utilized by the VAM to cool the cold storage chamber. 
Since, the cold storage can be cooled to temperature as low as 0oC, a wide variety of 
fruit, vegetables, and horticulture produce can be stored there. The electricity generated 
by the system is enough to power domestic, community, as well as productive loads in a 
typical village.
#2.3.3 Hydro
#Technology
Hydropower is a mature technology that is currently used to produce cost-effective, 
renewable electricity. In hydropower technology, water’s potential energy is converted to 
kinetic energy and spins the blade of a turbine, which activates a generator to produce 
electricity. 
Hydropower plants have two basic configurations: dams with reservoirs and run-of-river 
plants, with no reservoirs. The dam scheme can be sub-divided into small dams with nightand-day regulation, large dams with seasonal storage and pumped storage reversible plants 
(for pumping and generation) for energy storage and night-and-day regulation. 
Pumped storage plants consist of two or more natural or artificial (dams) reservoirs at 
different elevations. When electricity generation exceeds grid demand, the energy is stored 
by pumping water from the lower to the higher reservoir. During peak electricity demand 
periods, water flows back to the lower reservoir through the turbine, thus generating 
electricity. In these kinds of plants, reversible Francis devices are used both for pumping 
water and for generating electricity.
Small-scale hydropower is normally designed to run in-river. This is an environmentally 
friendlier option because it does not significantly interfere with the river’s natural flow. 
Small-scale hydro is often used for distributed generation applications to provide electricity 
to rural populations.
In Afghanistan, hydropower plants are classified as pico-hydro (0 to 5 kW), micro-hydro (5 
to 100 kW), mini-hydro (101kW to 1000 kW), small-hydro (1001Kw to 10,000 kW) and largehydro (above 10,001 kW).
Hydropower also provides other key services, such as flood control, irrigation and potable 
water reservoirs. Hydropower is an extremely flexible electricity generation technology. 
Hydro reservoirs provide built-in energy storage that enables a quick response to electricity 
demand fluctuations across the grid, optimization of electricity production and 
compensation for power losses from other sources.
#Global status and outlook
Globally, a total capacity of 1,096 GW hydropower has been installed by the end of 2016. 
Countries such as China, Brazil, USA, Canada, Norway, India, and Russian federation 
accounted for 62% of installed capacities at the end of 2016. Other than increasing new 
capacities, there is always a demand for refurbishment of existing plants to improve the 
efficiency of output, as well as environmental performance in the face of new regulatory 
requirements. Innovations in hydropower technology include variable speed technology for 
new and refurbished pumped storage plants, which assist in further integration of variable 
renewable resources. 
#Status and relevance for Afghanistan
In Afghanistan, micro hydropower plants (MHPs) are commissioned and working in different 
provinces. In 2014, 7 MHP systems ranging from (200 kW to 500 kW) were commissioned in 
Badakhshan province. These MHPs were later handed over to DABS and are currently run by 
DABS. Afghanistan, has many feasible sites for MHP plants. Local expertise is available for 
operation and maintenance of these systems in Afghanistan. MHP systems can play a crucial 
role in economic and social development in the remote areas in Afghanistan.
As per ICE Energy Sector Report (Q2 2016), 42 MW Salma Hydro Power Plant (HPP) is in the 
final stage of completion by Indian government support and a 7.2 MW hydropower plant at 
Faizabad in KfW funding is under construction. Kajaki I HPP is expanding to a capacity of 
18.5 MW with funding support from USAID and construction contract for Kajaki II HPP with 
100 MW capacity has been signed with a private company. Construction of Surobi II HPP at 
Kabul with capacity of 180 MW and Baghdara HPP with capacity of 240 MW is under progress 
with support from private sector.
#Micro Hydro Kinetic Turbine
Tata Power in India has successfully commissioned 
and tested a 10-kW low-head micro-hydro turbine, 
installed in the tailrace of the 150 MW Bhira hydro 
power plant in Maharashtra. The micro turbine 
generator was indigenously manufactured in Mumbai 
by Casmir Group based on the patented technology 
licensed from the University of Southampton.
The turbine utilizes the existing flow rate available 
to generate clean energy. The AC power generated 
by the turbine generator is a function of the following 
three factors combined:
• Average water velocity in the range of 1.25 m/s to 
4 m/s (Increased power generation in faster flow);
• Minimum machine diameter of 2.1m requires 2.5m of water depth (Increased power generation 
in sites with deeper waters using the longer blade variants available);
• Continuous flows: total power generated depends on number of hours of water flow available 
at a site;
Other than applications in tailraces of existing hydropower plants, rivers and canals, the micro 
hydro turbine has a bi-directionality option to facilitate operations in tidal currents as well.
Source: http://www.tata.com/article/inside/Tata-Power-integrates-a-micro-hydro-turbine-at-its-Bhirahydro-power-station-in-Maharashtra
#2.3.4 Wind
#Technology
The kinetic energy of the moving air (or wind) is transformed into electrical energy by wind 
turbines or wind energy conversion systems. The wind forces the turbine’s rotor to spin, 
changing the kinetic energy to rotational energy by moving a shaft which is connected to a 
generator, thereby producing electrical energy through electromagnetism.
Wind power systems are categorized primarily by the grid connection (connected/ standalone) and wind turbine type (vertical/horizontal-axis). The specific system configuration is 
determined mainly by the wind condition (especially wind speed), land availability (or where 
the plant is sited), grid availability, turbine size and height, and blade size. Most large wind 
turbines are up-wind horizontal-axis turbines with three blades. Most small wind turbines 
are also horizontal-axis.
Horizontal-axis turbines are being used commercially all over the world. The rotating shaft 
is mounted parallel to the wind flow/ground, and the turbines can have two types of rotors: 
up-wind and down-wind. The advantage of up-wind turbines is that they are minimally 
influenced by the turbulence caused by the tower. However, a yaw mechanism is needed to 
align the turbine with the prevailing wind. 
A group of wind turbines in the same location used for production of electricity constitutes 
a wind farm. A large wind farm may consist of several hundred individual wind turbines 
distributed over an extended area, but the land between the turbines may be used for 
agricultural or other purposes.
Wind energy is very consistent from year to year but has significant variation over shorter 
time scales. It is therefore connected to the national electricity grid or can even be used as 
a hybrid option with other electricity generating/ storage sources to give a reliable 
electricity supply such as wind-solar hybrid, wind-diesel hybrid etc. Such hybrid options can 
be used as mini-grids for supplying electricity to areas with no electricity grid.
Wind energy projects are common for off-grid applications such as water pumping and 
electricity supply through wind power systems, wind-solar/ wind-diesel hybrid systems. 
#Global status and outlook
Globally, 487 GW of wind power technology has been installed by the end of 2015 of which, 
the largest capacity exists in China, followed by United States, Germany and India. The wind 
power capacity at the end of 2016 was enough to meet almost 4% of total world electricity 
production. Wind power is now considered as the most cost-effective option in a large 
number of countries for new power generating capacity.
#Status and relevance for Afghanistan
Afghanistan has a good wind resource potential especially in South East part of the country. 
Sixteen wind monitoring stations have been installed in different parts of the country. A few 
small wind turbine systems (<50kW) are installed in different locations of the country. The 
first ever wind turbine system of capacity 100 kW with battery backup system has been 
installed in Panjsher province. A couple of local wind turbine manufacturers are available 
in Kabul city who can fabricate up to 20kW wind turbines with accessories.
Wind power systems can be used in various configurations such as the following: 
• Wind farms can contribute significantly to national grid electricity 
• Wind mechanical pumps, which can be very useful for irrigation purposes especially 
in Farah, Nimroz and Herat provinces, because of high wind speeds
• Small mechanical wind turbine can be hybridized with DG sets for remote areas, 
institutional and agricultural loads 
Technology and systems
Bio-energy is generated from organic matter derived from plants or animals available on 
renewable basis also known as “Biomass”. It is used for energy applications covering a 
variety of practices and technologies, ranging from traditional heat production for cooking 
and/ or space heating to modern combined heat and power generation or biofuels 
production. Majority of the biomass energy is consumed in developing countries for 
traditional uses with very low efficiency (10%-20%) such as cooking, while modern uses of 
biomass for heat and power generation include mainly high-efficiency, direct biomass 
combustion, co-firing with coal and biomass gasification.
Direct, traditional uses of biomass for heating and cooking applications rely on a wide range 
of feedstock and simple devices, but the energy efficiency of these applications is very low 
because of biomass moisture content, low energy density and the type of the basic input. 
Pre-treatment is done in order to improve biomass characteristics and make handling, 
transport, and conversion processes more efficient and cost-effective such as:
• Drying to reduce moisture content and transport costs of biomass feedstock and 
improve combustion efficiency; 
• Palletisation and Briquetting to mechanically compact bulky biomass, such as 
sawdust or agricultural residues; 
• Torrefaction (for woody biomass) in which biomass is heated in the absence of oxygen 
to between 200-300°C and turned into char, with a process that is similar to 
traditional charcoal production.;
• Pyrolysis is a further thermo-chemical pre-treatment process during which biomass 
is heated to temperatures of 400-600°C in the absence of oxygen to produce pyrolysis 
oil (also referred to as bio-oil), along with solid charcoal and a by-product gas.;
Biomass is distributed worldwide and is extensively used for energy, however, securing good 
quality feedstock at affordable prices over a plant’s lifetime is crucial for biomass power 
projects. 
Bio-energy is also being used in other forms and applications such as:
#I. Improved cook-stoves 
Improved cook-stoves is basically a combustion device which burns biomass fuel more 
efficiently with reduced emissions and offers cleaner cooking energy solutions. These are 
basically of two types; fixed type and portable type. The portable cook-stoves are also of 
two types; natural draft and forced draft. Forced draft cook-stoves are more efficient cookstoves compared to natural draft ones. Each type of cook-stove can be used for domestic as 
well as community cooking applications. The improved cook-stoves may be made with 
metal, ceramic and terracotta/ pottery (durable type) and combination thereof. 
#II. Biogas systems
Biogas refers to a mixture of different gases produced by the breakdown of organic matter 
in the absence of oxygen. Biogas can be produced from raw materials such as agricultural 
waste, manure, municipal waste, industrial waste, plant material, sewage, green waste or 
food waste. Biogas systems provide:
• Clean gaseous fuel for cooking and lighting;
• Digested slurry from biogas plants to be used as enriched bio-manure to supplement 
chemical fertilizers;
• Improved sanitation in villages and semi -urban areas by linking sanitary toilets with 
biogas plants;
#III. Waste to energy systems
Waste to Energy systems allow treatment and processing of waste from urban & rural areas 
and industries, resulting in energy generation. Energy is generated from the organic fraction 
of waste (biodegradable as well as non-biodegradable) through thermal, thermo-chemical, 
biochemical and electrochemical methods.
• Thermal conversion: The process involves thermal degradation of waste under high 
temperature. In this complete oxidation of the waste occurs under high temperature. 
The major technological option under this category is Incineration.;
• Thermo-chemical conversion: This process entails high temperature driven 
decomposition of organic matter to produce either heat energy or fuel oil or gas. They 
are useful for wastes containing high percentage of organic non-biodegradable matter 
and low moisture content. The main technological options under this category include 
Pyrolysis and Gasification. The products of these processes (producer gas, exhaust gases 
etc.) can be used purely as heat energy or further processed chemically, to produce a 
range of end products. ;
• Bio-chemical conversion: This process is based on enzymatic decomposition of organic 
matter by microbial action to produce methane gas, and alcohol etc. This process, on 
the other hand, is preferred for wastes having high percentage of organic, biodegradable (putrescible) matter and high level of moisture/ water content, which aids 
microbial activity. The major technological options under this category are anaerobic 
digestion (bio-methanation) and fermentation. Of the two, anaerobic digestion is the 
most frequently used method for waste to energy, and fermentation is emerging. ;
• Electrochemical conversion: Electrochemical conversion in the context of waste to 
energy refers typically to microbial fuel cells (MFC). These systems are developed to 
trap the energy from wastes, where the reduction-oxidation machinery of immobilized 
microbial cells is catalytically exploited, for the accelerated transfer of electrons from 
organic wastes, to generate electricity and bio-hydrogen gas. However, this 
methodology needs extensive evaluation studies on bulk scale liquid waste treatments 
and stands at a nascent level, worldwide.;
#Global status and outlook
Globally bio-power capacity reached 112 GW by the end of 2016. The share of bio-energy in 
total global primary energy consumption has remained steady since 2005, at around 10.5%.
By country, the United States is the largest producer of electricity from biomass sources and 
by region, European Union leads both the bio-power generation and capacity.
#Status and relevance in Afghanistan
Most of the rural population in Afghanistan is active in agriculture and livestock sector, 
however bio-energy technologies are still in a nascent stage. Only a limited number of family 
type biogas plants have been installed in eastern provinces and central parts of the country 
through MRRD, BORDA Afghanistan and a couple of NGOs. Recently, some studies are under 
process for biomass energy projects in Kabul city and Balkh province under supervision of 
Kabul Municipality, Ministry of Urban development. Applications of bio-energy such as waste 
to energy and biogas units are relevant to Afghanistan. Raw material (municipality waste) 
is available in the cities which can be utilized in the waste to energy projects for electricity 
generation. In remote areas, agricultural wastes are available that can act as a raw material 
for biogas plants. Improved cook-stoves can also help to improve indoor air quality and offers 
cleaner cooking energy solutions. These can improve health protection of women and 
society in villages and keep the environment clean. 
#2.3.6 Geothermal
#Technology
Geothermal electricity generation is a mature, baseload generation technology that utilizes 
steam or hot water from geothermally active areas to provide very competitive electricity 
where high-quality resources exist. Geothermal energy originates from the geological 
processes during formation of the planet, radioactive decay of minerals, and from solar 
energy absorbed at the surface. Geothermal energy is available around the clock, 
independent of the surface climatic conditions. Geothermal resources include dry steam, 
hot water, hot dry rock, magma, and ambient ground heat. 
#Global status and outlook
Globally, 13.5 GW of geothermal power has been installed at the end of 2016. Top five 
leading countries in the geothermal power generation are USA, Philippines, Indonesia, 
Mexico and New Zealand. Geothermal direct use capacity has increased by a yearly average 
rate of 6% in recent years, while direct heat consumption has grown by 3.5%. The 
geothermal industry continues to face significant project development risk; various efforts 
are under way to ameliorate such risks.
#Status and relevance in Afghanistan
Geothermal energy is a highly valuable, clean and reliable heat and power source in 
Afghanistan, which is still untapped. Historically, geothermal energy in Afghanistan has been 
only used for medical bathing. Further geological, geochemical, and geophysical studies 
are required to characterize the reservoirs of numerous geothermal prospects in Afghanistan 
for electricity generation and other applications.
#2.3.7 Other related technologies
In addition to the above RE technologies, there are other related technologies which are 
significant for RE development in Afghanistan.
#Air source heat pump
An air source heat pump (ASHP) is a system which uses energy to draw heat from outside to 
inside a building, or vice versa. This heat can then be used to heat radiators, underfloor 
heating systems and hot water circuit. Air source heat pump can absorb heat from the air 
even when the temperature is as low as -15° C.
The energy that is produced by the air source heat pump is considered as a renewable 
because the air is heated by sun which then heats the house, even though the pump itself 
is powered by electricity. Air source heat pumps are an attractive alternative to 
conventional domestic heating systems such as LPG boilers. The air source heat pump is 
promising solution for building segments with limited roof area availability.
A heat pump system consists of a compressor and two coils made of copper tubing. In heating 
mode, the refrigerant in the outside coils extracts heat from the air and evaporates into 
vapor form. The indoor coils release heat from the refrigerant while it condenses into a 
liquid. A reversing valve changes the direction of the refrigerant flow for cooling in summer.
There are two main types of air source heat pump systems: Air to Water and Air to Air. Airto-Air systems typically use fans to circulate warm air around the home and cannot be used 
to heat water. The performance of air source heat pumps is measured by the coefficient of 
performance (COP). A COP of 3 means the heat pump generates 3 units of heat energy for 
every 1 unit of electricity it consumes. Globally the market for heat pumps is assessed at 
58.3 million units (2013) and predicted to increase at a CAGR of 10.6% for 2014-2020. Air 
source heat pumps have become widely available commercially only in the past few years.
The efficiency of heat pumps is expected to 
improve by 2030 by 30-50% for heating and 
20-40% for cooling. Cost reductions are also 
expected due to technology improvements,
market penetration and synergy with 
thermal storage systems.
The figure illustrates the working of an Air 
Source Heat Pump.
#Energy storage
Renewable energy sources are intermittent in nature, producing energy when the sun is 
shining and the wind is blowing, and therefore energy storage becomes important for 
supplying uninterrupted energy. Energy storage technologies absorb energy when production 
is more than the demand and store it for a period before releasing it to supply energy. By 
storing the energy produced and delivering it on demand, it can level out peaks in output 
to create a continuous, reliable stream of power throughout the day.
Energy storage technologies are divided into following six main categories. 
• Electric batteries store electricity in the form of chemical energy and are mainly of two 
types – rechargeable and non-rechargeable;
• Flywheels are mechanical devices that stores electricity as rotational energy which is 
harnessed to deliver instantaneous electricity;
• Compressed air energy storage stores off-peak electricity to compress air which is later 
discharged to the gas turbine to generate electricity during peak periods;
• Thermal storage systems store thermal energy by heating or cooling a storage medium 
which can be used at a later stage for heating and cooling applications and power 
generation;
• Pumped hydropower storage facilities store energy in the form of water in an upper 
reservoir, pumped from another reservoir at a lower elevation. During periods of high 
electricity demand, power is generated by releasing the stored water through turbines 
in the same manner as a conventional hydropower station.;
Today, energy (electricity and thermal) storage technologies exist at different levels of 
development, from the R&D to demonstration and commercialization. Figure 19 shows the 
development stages of various energy storage technologies. The energy storage market is 
estimated to grow to an annual installation size of 6 GW in 2017 and over 40 GW by 2022 
from 0.34 GW installed in 2012 and 2013.
#2.4 Recommended RE technologies and systems
This chapter has discussed and provided a long list of technologies that are to be harnessed 
in Afghanistan.The following table gives a summary of all RETs that are being studied as 
possibilities for implementation, along with their applications.
#Key highlights of Renewable energy sector
• By the end of 2016, the renewable energy installed capacity was enough to supply an 
estimated 24.5% of global electricity, with hydropower providing about 16.6%. The world now 
adds more renewable power capacity annually than it adds (net) capacity from all fossil fuels 
combined. [Renewables 2017 Global Status Report, REN21];
• The record lab solar PV cell efficiency has reached 25.6 % for mono-crystalline and 20.8 % for 
multi-crystalline silicon wafer-based technology. [Photovoltaics Report 2016, Fraunhofer ISE]
• Even in conservative scenarios and assuming no major technological breakthroughs, solar 
power will be the cheapest form of electricity in many regions of the world. Depending on 
annual sunshine, power cost of 4–6 cents/kWh are expected by 2025, reaching 2–4 cents/kWh 
by 2050;
• By end of 2015, global concentrating PV (CPV) capacity reached 360 MW, most of which are 
high-concentration systems (CR: 300-1000) [Renewables 2016 Global Status Report, REN21]. 
With concentrator technology, module efficiencies of up to 38.9 % (lab record) & 33 % 
(commercially) have been reached. [Photovoltaics Report 2016, Fraunhofer ISE];
• Since first floating plant installation in 2007, the total installed capacity globally has now 
reached 93 MWp with 70 floating PV plant worldwide. The biggest floating plant has a capacity 
of 20 MWp.;
• A new form of CSP, called STEM (Solar Thermo Electric Magaldi), which uses fluidized silica 
sand as a thermal storage and heat transfer medium to produce 24-hour industrial scale power 
for off-grid applications is receiving international interest. By using fluidized solids as 
alternative to other storage media, the use of corrosive or environmentally unfriendly fluids 
can be cut down and the receiver can be operated at much higher temperature. On 30th June 
2016, the first STEM industrial model plant started operations in San Filippo del Mela (Sicily).;
• Repowering, i.e. replacing old wind turbines with modern higher capacity turbines, is on the 
rise. It has led to increase in wind power while reducing the footprint. A 2 MW wind turbine 
with an 80-m diameter rotor now generates four to six times more electricity than a 500 kW, 
40 m diameter rotor built in 1995. [IEA Website];
• Bioenergy accounts for around 7% of all industrial heat consumption, and has not increased in 
recent years. [Renewables 2017 Global Status Report, REN21];
• Asia has the highest number of small-scale biogas digesters, with more than 100 million people 
in rural China and 4.83 million people in India have access to digesters to produce gas for 
cooking and space heating. [Renewables 2016 Global Status Report, REN21];
• Two lithium ion battery storage projects totalling 37.5 MW & 150 MWh is under construction 
phase in Southern California. When completed, the larger, 120 MWh (30 MW for 4 hours) 
project will be the single biggest lithium ion battery in service on a utility grid in the world. 
In March 2016, a project with 50 MW, 300 MWh sodium-sulfur battery facility went into 
service.;
• In October 2016, the Powerwall 2 (an upgrade to its previous version), a home battery unit, 
was unveiled by Tesla Company. It is considered a game changer for the residential energy 
storage market. The improved version has a capacity of 13.5 kWh and has an inbuilt Inverter 
of 5 kW. The cost per kWh of the battery with inverter is around 407 USD but after deducting 
the cost of inverter, it is only 259 USD.;
#3 DEVELOPMENT OF PROJECT PIPELINE USING DECISION TOOL
The type of projects that could be taken up for each RE technology, are identified through 
a process that is developed specifically for this Roadmap and is presented here in the form 
of a Decision Tool. 
#3.1 Developing the project pipeline
A 3-level process is developed for creating a pipeline of RE projects in Afghanistan ensuring 
RE resource are exploited by suitable system configurations. Level 1 takes into account the 
techno-economical RE resource potential, grid availability, land availability and logistics 
which are very region-specific in Afghanistan. This process gives an idea about suitable RE 
resource and the implementing technology and also point at suitability of utility scale vs 
off-grid systems. The next Level 2, evaluates various factors such as existing load profiles, 
energy consumption pattern, terrain characteristics, population densities, available energy 
resources, and other social factors to indicate mini-grids vs stand-alone system choices. 
Level 3 discusses about requirements of actual implementation of RE projects by conducting 
surveys, devising suitable business models, and involving existing institutions such as NGOs, 
MFIs, and CDCs.
The 3-level process evolves into a Decision Tool that is presented in this chapter. This 
decision tool is aligned with the needs of the government, the project developers and the 
users, and acts as a guiding principle to assist them in decision making. It is presented in 
the form of a flow chart, supported by qualitative and quantitative parameters. The Decision 
Tool can be linked with the GIS system for strategic planning of projects. 
#3.2 Decision process and levels 
#Level 1:
At level 1, Decision Tool aids the policy makers who are at the first level of the 
decision-making hierarchy in deciding whether to plan for utility scale grid- connected or 
off-grid projects. The decision is aided by ensuring the feasible RE resource at the first step 
and grid availability or any grid extension plan in the near future for electricity evacuation. 
Next immediate factor to consider is availability of land and proper road connectivity to the 
proposed site for installation of a grid-connected/ utility-scale RE project. Finally, an 
important point for consideration is security of the proposed site as grid-scale project 
developers would prefer safe and secured operating environment. Thus, this level serves as 
a quick and practical indicator to decide between grid-connected/ utility scale or off-grid 
markets.
#Level 2:
The outcome at level 1 is further evaluated to determine the most appropriate RE 
system configuration. A complete solution depends not only on the technical and financial 
parameters, which are quantitative in nature, but also on qualitative socio-economic 
parameters. The first indicator at this stage is the concentration of population to be served 
by the RE system. This gives an idea about the presence of load demand in the area. For 
instance, stand-alone systems work well in locations with scattered population and 
dispersed demand. The second indicator is the existing load type that defines the prevalent 
electricity consumer category- industrial, residential or rural, and government; and any 
application-specific demand. Presence of other energy supplying sources such as diesel 
plants allows opting for RE-diesel hybrid mini-grid market. 46
#Level 3:
The final level aids in realizing ease of implementation of the identified system 
configuration at levels 1 and 2. These are used to micro-site the project and evaluate the 
social acceptability and financial viability of the utility-scale, mini-grid or stand-alone RE 
project. Ultimately, these parameters enable the project developers and the users in 
developing a mutually agreed upon business model, thus suggesting project design for the 
project pipeline.
#3.4 Description of parameters
#Applying 3-level process for developing project pipeline
#1. Level 1
a. Check for RE resource potential from the RE resource maps.
b. Check for grid availability and grid extension plan. If “Yes” then utility scale 
projects can come up. If “No”, then mini-grid or stand-alone projects can come 
up. 
c. Then check for land availability, road connectivity, and security if “utility-scale” 
is the outcome above. If all are “Yes”, then conclude at utility-scale projects and 
move to Stage 3. 
#2. Level 2 
a. Check for population concentration and load type. If the answer for population is 
“concentrated” and the load type is “residential, industrial, and government”, 
then RE mini-grid projects are possible. Also, check for other operational 
electricity sources available in a particular region. If “Yes”, then RE- hybrid minigrid projects are possible. 
b. If population is “scattered” and load type is “residential” then stand-alone 
systems are possible. Check for application specific demand such as for irrigation 
pumps, and others, then stand-alone RE pumps are suggested.
#3. Level 3 
a. For “Utility-scale”, enabling steps such micro-siting, grid-stability, actual land
availability, etc. are taken up. 
b. For “Mini-grid”, load distribution pattern, site topography etc. are to be studied.
c. For “stand-alone projects” check for presence of NGO’s, MFI’s and CDC’s that 
enable implementation through community preparedness, financing, creating 
awareness, etc. 
#3.5 Application of Decision Tool for creating the project pipeline
The Decision Tool and its 3-level process is a dynamic process which can be modified to 
suite the changing RE market environment. The process is applied by considering the 
identified RE potential, technology application, and suitable markets. 
As per chapter 2, the recommended technologies for utility scale projects are solar, wind, 
biomass, hydro and geothermal. Table 9 identifies provinces suitable for this market by 
applying the five criteria as in level-1 of the Decision Tool. Afghanistan National Grid Plan 
map has been referred to at this level. (Annexure B)
Further, the provinces with no or limited grid availability but high solar radiation are 
considered ideal for mini-grid or stand-alone projects in level 2 of the Decision Tool. 
Subsequently, population concentration and load characteristics are used for identifying 
potential mini-grid projects. Highly populated provinces are assumed to contain load mix of 
“residential, industrial, commercial, and government”. The presence of operating diesel 
gensets are prioritised for developing diesel-RE hybrid mini-grids with an understanding that 
it will immediately reduce the dependence on diesel, while simultaneously providing a 
reliable back-up or supplement power supply system to RE based mini-grid.
Accordingly, all the provincial capitals and trade clusters are suitable to implement standalone or DG-based hybrid SPV mini-grid projects. The exact sizing and technical design is to 
be done on the basis of detailed feasibility for each project considering topography, demand 
pattern, among others which takes the user to the third-level of the Decision Tool. 
Finally, stand-alone projects are designed and customised for specific sites and for specific 
loads, i.e. power packs for universities, solar pumps for irrigation or drinking water supply, 
power supply units for telecom towers, biomass gasifiers for community cooking or 
electricity needs etc. The third level of the Decision Tool helps in conducting site specific 
studies and analysis for all types of stand- alone projects, including user survey, stakeholder 
consultations, enterprise development studies etc. 
#3.6 Prioritizing RE projects
The Decision Tool provides a method to create a project pipeline. However, deployment of 
RE projects may vary from each other on the basis of several considerations and hence, need 
to be prioritised. Some of these considerations would be:
• Simplicity: How easy they are to construct, operate and maintain ;
• Scalability: Whether they can be implemented across a variety of sizes and locations ;
• Familiarity: What is their familiarity in Afghanistan on the basis of past experience;
• Viability: Whether they are a financially sound option;
The above considerations are used in a customised knock-out criteria method34 to qualify 
them as hot (high priority) and cold (low priority) and is applied below to prioritise the 
deployment of some RETs and downgrade some others in the context of Afghanistan. 
The High priority and strategically important projects and their achievable targets are 
described here:
#a) Solar PV utility scale 
The Decision Tool points at setting up a total of 800 MW of solar utility scale PV through 
Solar Power Parks (SPPs) and Independent Power Producers (IPPs), with an optimum capacity 
of 100 MW for SPPs and 10 MW for IPPs. Land requirement will roughly be of the order to 
1250-1400 hectares for 800 MW. The proposed 100 MW SPP at Naghlu and 10 MW IPP at 
Kandahar will be trailblazers in this segment. SPP model is discussed in details in next 
chapter. 
#b) Utility scale wind farms
Utility scale wind power projects, commonly known as wind farms, both in power parks 
mode and IPP mode, are high priority projects and upto 600 MW capacity addition is 
recommended using this technology. 
#c) Roof-top solar PV
This market segment is of strategic importance to Afghanistan’s major cities and provincial 
capitals on account of unmet captive demand and dependence on diesel genset in most of 
government, public and private buildings, and available roof space. Assuming an average 1 
kWp system on residential households and multiples of 10 kWp in public and private 
institutional buildings, an aggregate capacity of 420 MWp can be installed using this 
technology. The proposed 10 MWp roof-top PV project in Kabul would be the first-of-its 
kind, which will be followed by similar projects in other major towns and provincial capitals 
that are/ will be connected to the national/ provincial grids.
#d) Bio-methanation of municipal solid waste
The conversion of municipal solid waste into energy is of strategic importance to Afghanistan 
considering the amount of solid waste generated in major municipalities. For instance, Kabul 
generates approximately 1600 tonnes of MSW daily. The first proposed pilot project for 6.0 
MW in Kabul municipality is an encouraging initiative. The Roadmap recommends more such 
projects, totalling to about 56 MW aggregated installed capacity.
#e) Mini-grids - Solar PV, MHP and hybrids
Mini-grids have emerged as viable alternative to grid extension for rural/ semi-urban 
communities’ world over. Diesel based mini-grids are commonly used in Afghanistan, which 
need to be either replaced or hybridized with solar, wind and MHP technologies. In addition, 
new mini-grids need to be installed in load centers and provincial towns. Roadmap 
recommends a total of 720 MW of installed capacities. About 25 mini-grids on average 500 
kW capacities are being proposed under the ASERD programme of MRRD, which will kickstart this segment. 
#f) Solar PV stand-alone systems, include solar pumping
Solar PV stand-alone systems consisting of street lights, home lighting and domestic systems, 
power packs for telecom towers, solar pumps, portable lights and battery chargers are some 
of the systems that can play a critical role in improving energy access of rural communities. 
Upto 126 MWp worth of aggregate capacity can be installed in this segment as per this 
Roadmap. Private enterprises are already marketing these systems in Afghanistan.
Initiatives such as ‘Citizens’ Charter Afghanistan Programme’ will provide a further boost to 
this segment. 
#g) Non-concentrating solar thermal systems
Given the requirement of hot-water (and low-grade heat) for domestic, community and 
commercial purposes throughout the year in Afghanistan, non-concentrating solar thermal 
systems (flat-plate or ETC) can play a critical role in providing thermal energy to these 
applications. Accordingly, Roadmap suggests a total target of 60 MW under this category.
#h) Biogas and improved cookstoves for cooking energy
In addition to solar thermal systems, biogas and improved cookstoves will make a significant 
contribution in thermal energy sector by providing clean energy for cooking. This Roadmap 
suggests a deployment of such systems with an aggregate capacity of around 6.7 MW.
#i) Concentrating Solar Power (CSP) 
Although CSP has not yet been introduced in Afghanistan, it is a proven technology and there 
are operational power plants globally as well as in the region. Since the solar radiation 
levels, particularly DNI levels are high in Afghanistan, at least a few pilot CSP plants are 
recommended to be set up in any one the provinces high with solar radiations levels. Most 
commonly sized capacity amongst operational CSP plants globally is 50 MW. 
#j) Floating PV (Floatovoltaics)
Though a relatively new concept world-wide, there are already 70 FPV projects currently 
operational, most of these in Japan. The sizes range from as small as 5 kWp to the largest 
one being 20 MWp. Most of these FPV plants are installed on reservoirs. Considering the fact 
that Afghanistan has significant numbers of reservoirs and dams for irrigational and 
electricity generation purposes, this Roadmap recommends setting up of 10.5 MWp of 
floating PV plants of varying capacities on the basis of detailed feasibility studies, including 
Environmental-Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) studies. 
#k) Large hydro projects
Large hydro projects are now being considered as renewable energy projects. Their 
contribution to Afghanistan’s total energy mix is significant. While the plan for installing 
large hydro projects under NSSP is already underway, this Roadmap recommends focussing 
on nearly 1750 MW worth of projects that are stalled due to several reasons.
With these and other projects being commissioned, 2000 MW of additional renewable energy 
capacity can be added. 
#4 BUSINESS MODELS FOR RE PROJECTS IN AFGHANISTAN
The renewable energy market in Afghanistan is still in its nascent stages. As a result, 
structured business models, which characterize mature markets, are not yet in place. The 
market landscape is dominated by government programmes, supported by bilateral or 
multilateral development partners. The private sector acts as turnkey or installation 
contractors, with little or no financial liabilities in the project.
However, the introduction of RENP and feed-in tariffs for connecting such projects to the 
grid has given a fillip to the sector. As a result, there is a push for structured and 
standardized business models, aimed at engaging key stakeholders (private sector, 
government and communities) to exploit win-win possibilities in the market. 
This chapter seeks to present business models relevant to Afghanistan, which are in sync 
with the national context. These could be introduced so as to guide and steer renewable 
energy development in a structured manner. Importantly, implementation of the business 
models shall serve to engage the private sector, thereby infusing private capital in the 
market.
As discussed in the subsequent chapters, development of the RE sector shall take place in 
stages. Each stage is the outcome of policy directions issued by government, and the 
resultant response from the private sector and other stakeholders. As the Stage-Gate model 
later explains in next chapter, the expansion of the RE sector and its components follows 
the 3 stages of market seeding, market creation and market transformation. This chapter 
also attempts to demonstrate how, and to what extent, the implementation of business 
models helps in transformation of the markets in each stage.
#4.1 From markets to business models 
The renewable energy market in Afghanistan is segregated into three categories (i.e. utility 
scale, mini-grids, and stand-alone) each addressing a specific objective of the Roadmap as 
presented below:
#Large, utility scale
The large-scale project landscape is dominated by state run power generation units and 
independent power producers. The business model for large power producers is based on 
considerations of assured and long-term power off-take. Financing is also a key requirement 
given the capital-intensive nature of power plants. In addition, producers need proper 
infrastructure to set up their MW scale power plants. Thus, the power purchase agreement 
(PPA) assumes primary importance for large scale, MW scale power plants. 
#Small and medium, micro-utility or mini-grid application
In this segment, the operator manages a self-contained grid (resembling a micro utility), it
has to manage loads and ensure that outages are minimized to improve the viability of the 
project. Load development and management is a key feature of business models in this 
segment.
The business model requires the entrepreneur to make investments in power generation 
and/or distribution systems that would optimally serve its command area. This segment is 
also marked by use of new technologies and the application of ICT enabled features to 
ensure optimality in production and distribution.58
#Micro, standalone systems 
The standalone segment has seen some market movement via outright purchases of solar 
powered home systems. However, this market is largely non-formal and lacks quality 
assurances. The segment has significant potential in Afghanistan with the centralized grid 
not being a cost-effective option in several pockets of the country dominated by 
mountainous terrain and spatially dispersed communities. 
With this generic categorization of markets, the approach adopted in developing business 
models for Afghanistan is to bring the understanding of what has worked globally, and 
customize it to the local Afghan context. For each market segment, the following section 
identifies business models customized in the Afghan context. 
#4.2 Solar Power Parks (SPP)
#Description
SPP is a dedicated and demarcated zone for development of solar PV power projects. Several 
power producers operate within a SPP. The park provides project developers with proper 
infrastructure and access to facilities for power generation and export to the grid against a 
firm Power Purchase Agreement (PPA). In doing so, project development risks are minimized 
for the individual developer. SPPs facilitate developers by reducing the number of required 
approvals. The solar park is typically developed and operated by a Special Purpose Vehicle 
or a service provider, usually called the Solar Power Park Developer or SPPD. 
While this section discusses the SPPs, similar approach may also be considered for setting 
up of wind power parks/farms. 
#Salient features 
As defined above, a single SPP can accommodate several projects promoted by a number of 
private sector entities, all facing roughly similar conditions for power generation and sale, 
which are governed in their individual power purchase agreements signed with the off-taker, 
such as DABS in this case. The activity of setting up the infrastructure for a SPP is generally 
anchored by a government entity. This entity, in the role of the SPPD, executes the 
following:
• Acquisition of land and developing it for SPP;
• Getting land related clearances and approvals that are required to convert it to land 
suitable for SPP development;
• Developing approach roads, water supply and distribution, drainage and other 
related infrastructure to each project within the SPP;
• Creating the power transmission network within the park and maintaining it; also 
setting up power evacuation infrastructure to connect to the grid;
• Providing security for SPP;
After execution of these tasks, the project developers are invited to invest in setting up 
solar PV projects through a bidding process. Projects are set up through Build-Own-OperateMaintain (BOOM) process. Project developers are expected to undertake investments related 
to setting up and maintaining the projects over the tenure of their PPAs. Projects may be 
transferred to the government upon expiry of PPA.
In addition, the following features may be relevant in the specific context of Afghanistan:
• Specific policies for SPPs are required, to provide regulatory support to private 
sector/other stakeholders. These could be generic, or tailored to suit the needs of a 
specific SPP.;
• A corporate body is needed to act as the SPPD. This could be a subsidiary of a utility 
or any other PPP arrangement. This corporate body shall need to develop its own 
business plan, outlining revenues, costs and a plan to break even over the long run.;
• Larger scale solar projects need to be encouraged in view of their higher potential 
to bring down the cost of power generation. This is because capital costs per MW of 
developing solar PV projects reduce with an increase in project scale. ;
• The land in SPP shall be leased to project developers. The tenure of such leases shall 
be equal to the duration of the PPA.;
• Power purchase is governed by the PPA between each project developer and the 
utility i.e. DABS. Feed-in tariffs may be used to pre-determine tariffs for SPPs. In 
addition, tariffs could be announced by the government in advance or determined 
as part of a bidding process. ;
• Power is evacuated as must-take, purchased by the national transmission utility, 
DABS. Standards for metering and connectivity to grid shall follow the guidelines set 
out in Electricity Law and other relevant guidance documents.;
• PPA tenures may extend to 20 to 25 years, with suitable clauses governing tariff 
movements over time.;
• Projects shall have well-defined pathways after the expiry of the PPA. These 
pathways could include sale of asset to government, extension of PPA and others. ;
In terms of the institutional engagement in SPPs, major responsibilities of different 
institutions are expected to pan out as follows:
• Power sector regulatory body: The regulator shall define conditions for power 
evacuation (must-run and must-take), long term access, PPA and others.;
• Ministry of Energy and Water: Policy direction for setting up of the SPPs. These shall 
be classified under separate notification for a “SPP Scheme”. ;
• Special Purpose Vehicle: Govt. may set up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in the 
PPP mode (similar to AISA) for setting up and managing SPPs, like a Solar Power Park 
Developer (SPPD). This agency shall be entrusted with the task of setting up and 
managing the SPPs, and shall execute the following activities:
o Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) for each SPP;
o Site development for SPPs as indicated above;
o Facilitate single-window clearance for SPPs;
o Maintenance of the SPPs;
o Providing security for SPPs;;
Investments made by this agency can be realized from lease rentals and other fees 
against services that are paid by project developers. 
• Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS): DABS shall, as the transmission and 
distribution utility, shall finalize tariff rates for procurement of power from SPPs and 
procure the power. Wherever necessary, escrow mechanisms may also be set up to
provide revenue assurance to project developers.;
• Project Developer: The project developer shall set up its solar PV project and 
operate and maintain the same throughout the life of the PPA. Depending upon the 
terms of agreement, after expiry of the PPA the developer may hand over the project 
to the government.;
The significant advantage of the SPP in Afghanistan is that it can unlock private capital 
through the engagement of the private sector in the generation of MW scale power in the 
country. Thus, it would largely eliminate the need for national and/or provincial 
governments to invest their resources in power generation, whether centrally or in 
decentralised fashion. 
Furthermore, with the right incentive structures, the SPP model may be able to generate 
revenues for government agencies such as the SPPD. Finally, the SPP model is designed for 
locations where land is plentifully available. This shall build infrastructure such as roads, 
power and water lines to the site and around, thus developing the local micro-economy and 
resulting in decentralised development and reversing the course of migration.
Global experience demonstrates that SPPs or solar farms are typically around 100–200 MW 
in size, although SPPs of around 750 MW have recently been commissioned in Rewa, Madhya 
Pradesh. There are over twenty (20) countries, which have set up SPPs. However, in USA, 
China and India SPPs have tended to be larger in size, especially those installed in the past 
few years (2012 onwards). Importantly these countries started off with 100 MW size parks, 
and gradually moved up in scale with time.
The following schematic shows the SPP in terms of process flows and roles/ responsibilities 
of various actors.
#4.3 Distribution Franchisee (DF)
#Description
A Distribution Franchisee (DF) is an entity authorised by a distribution utility to distribute 
electricity on its behalf, in a particular area within the utility’s area of supply. The DF may 
invest in improvements in the existing distribution network to improve technical and 
commercial losses, better power quality and improved overall service delivery.
The DF business model works around a cluster of consumers such as industrial parks and 
municipalities, with DABS as generator and an independent qualified entity as the DF. 
Examples of DF could be the industrial park union, association of residents of a housing 
society, or any private agency interested in purchasing power from DABS (generator) and 
distributing it within the mandated zone (park, housing society etc.).
#Charanka Solar Park in Gujarat, India
The experience of neighbouring India on solar power parks has been noteworthy. Under 
the aegis of the Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), as many as 33 SPPs, with a 
cumulative capacity of 19,900 MW are either operational or under implementation. SECI 
has identified nodal agencies in prominent Indian states where solar power parks are 
planned. These nodal agencies form joint ventures with SECI and act as the SPPD
The Charanka Solar Park with an installed capacity of 590 MW was set up in the Indian 
state of Gujarat, by the Gujarat Power Corporation Limited. The park, located in Patan 
district, is spread over 5,384 acres of unused land. By the end of 2016, Charanka solar 
park has installed capacity of nearly 350 MW (March 2016). 
Among the first solar PV parks to be installed in India, Charanka has been developed as 
part of Gujarat solar parks. Policy support for solar power parks in India was derived from 
the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM), which laid down the broad 
objectives and guidelines. 
Subsequently, the Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) was set up by the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy (Ministry of New and Renewable Energy), Government of 
India. States interested in developing solar parks has to set up a Special Purpose Vehicle, 
generically called a Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD), who could form a joint venture 
with SECI, or choose to remain an independent agency. As a third option, the individual 
state could give responsibility to SECI to become the agency within the state. The choice 
of technology and identification of entrepreneurs within 
a solar park may be kept open and subjected to a bidding 
process.
The SPPD is responsible for setting up the solar park with 
the required infrastructure. For Charanka, the Gujarat 
Power Corporation Limited acted as the SPPD. With its 
overall mandate for power development, and considering 
favorable wind speeds in Charanka, few wind turbines 
were also commissioned to generate additional power.
The distribution franchisee can operate in several ways. It can use a basic model for 
operation and maintenance services against a commission or a fee, where the DF is 
responsible for billing, maintenance and collection activities. It can also have an advanced 
model where the DF invests in the local grid, improves technical performance and reduces 
Aggregate Technical & Commercial (ATC) losses, thereby providing 24x7 quality power at a 
premium. For energy-deficit industrial areas and parks in Afghanistan, the DF approach 
could be a cost-effective solution to meeting the industries’ needs of quality, low to high 
voltage power demand.
#Salient features 
The DF business model necessarily includes a generator that is owned by an entity different 
from the DF. The generator such as DABS (national utility) is then responsible for selling 
bulk power to DF for a pre-demarcated territory. The salient features are as follows:
• The utility sells electricity to the DF at a single point (such as a transformer) at a preagreed, bulk tariff that is governed by a power purchase agreement. DF distributes 
electricity to individual consumers at pre-agreed consumer tariff. This step assures the 
utility of payments from the DF, and thus de-risks it from engaging with a multitude of 
consumers. Usually, the DF is appointed in a zone where utility faces challenges in 
servicing the customer profitably.;
• The utility and DF enter into a long-term time bound contractual agreement wherein 
utility commits to supplying electricity to the DF. DF commits to undertaking Billing, 
Metering and Collection (BMC) activities, or making required investments / 
improvements in the distribution network, as the case may be.;
• The DF represents the utility on the ground and is provided with security and other 
administrative support. This is especially relevant in the context of Afghanistan, where 
local security issues could be present in certain provinces. The DF could be a local entity 
familiar with site-specific dynamics, which would assist in de-risking revenue collection 
and establishment of business ties with community members.;
• The DF may invest in setting up / upgrading / strengthening the distribution network, 
which may belong to the utility. Its investments include:
o Installing transformers, feeders and conducting continuous maintenance of the 
network ;
o Enhancing safety and security of the network by installing protective measures;
o Reducing theft and other commercial losses;
o Installing smart meters at consumers’ ends and maintaining a helpline to enhance 
customer care;;
• The DF may invest in additional back-up power generation options to provide 24x7 power 
to the consumers. This is more relevant for industrial and urban consumers;
• DF realizes its returns on above investments by charging pre-agreed consumer tariffs, 
that are usually at a premium (in return for better service delivery);
• Benefits to consumers served by the DF include improved power supply (both 
qualitatively and quantitatively) and improved complaint redressal;
• Benefits to utility include assured revenue collection (from a single-bulk-consumer) and 
reduced manpower deployment costs in the zone where DF operates ;
• DF benefits from financial returns from a performance turnaround in its zone, and may 
look to expand operations to similar zones. It also enjoys a customer base for 10-15 
years, which will offer opportunities for further business expansion;
Roles and responsibilities of various agencies in the DF model are explained below:
• Regulator: Lays down guidelines within the Electricity Law for defining and setting up 
distribution franchisees in Afghanistan ;
• Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW): Designs the DF Scheme in Pan-Afghanistan context 
along the above guidelines and provides policy support for its roll- out;
• Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS): Identify areas where power distribution can 
be licensed to DF. Enters into contract for sale of power and for the maintenance of 
DABS’s distribution infrastructure in the area now under the franchisee’s operations. 64
DABS shall provide necessary support to DF on the ground in the form of security and 
any other administrative / legal support as and when required;
• Distribution Franchisee (DF): Invests in, operates and maintains the distribution 
infrastructure over the tenure of its terms of agreement with DABS. Provides services to 
the consumers in the manner outlined in its terms of agreement;
• Consumers: Enter into agreement with the DF and pay tariffs as agreed upon.;
DF models have been successful across several countries, as a de-risking mechanism that 
enables both the generator and the franchisee to build on their individual competencies in 
a strategic, mutually beneficial scenario. In the neighbouring country, India for example, 
Torrent Power Limited (TPL) launched one of the first input based distribution franchisee 
operations in Bhiwandi circle of Maharashtra in western India. Reviewed by an independent 
agency, the model has successfully shown that aggregate technical and commercial (ATC) 
losses coming down from a high of 58% in 2007 to 18.5% in 2011, and around 20% as of 2015, 
providing profitable solutions for all stakeholders. Importantly, TPL has a ten-year mandate 
in Bhiwandi Circle, which is needed for it to recover its investments and make returns.
#4.4 Roof-top solar PV through net metering
#Description
In Afghanistan, there is significant potential of roof-top solar PV systems on account of levels 
of solar radiation consistently above 5.5 kWh/m2as well as available roof-top space, 
especially in urban locations. With largely low-rise architecture prevalent in the cities and 
towns, there is ample opportunity for development of roof-top solar PV projects due to 
abundance of sunshine. On the demand side, lack of reliable energy access coupled with 
high demand for electrical energy for lighting and other applications provide a ready market 
for roof-top based solar PV systems. With the advantage of net metering, households can 
also sell unused electricity back to the grid and provide more power for distribution. 
Net metering facility allows the user to export power from the solar PV unit as and when 
such power is unutilized. Similarly, if power supplied from the solar PV unit falls short of 
current demand at the user’s end, then the user draws electricity from the grid. At the end 
of a billing cycle (typically a month), the net power consumed / exported by the user is 
calculated (using the net meter), and the user either paid or charged accordingly. Net 
metering allows the user to partially recover its investment by selling surplus electricity 
generated.
#Salient features 
There are two main business models used in roof-top solar: CAPEX and OPEX models
• CAPEX model:
o The Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) model involves the owner of the roof and 
electricity distributor (DABS, in this case). The owner purchases all the 
necessary equipment for the generation of roof-top solar and sells the 
electricity generated to the distributor via a net-metering mechanism ;
o The operation and maintenance (O&M) of the system is generally done by an 
external contractor hired by the owner;
o The roof-top owner can enjoy government tax benefits and incentives for 
generating clean power;;
• OPEX model:
o The Operational Expenditure (OPEX) model involves the owner of the roof, a 
third-party implementation company and the electricity distributor. The roof 
owner rents out their roof to a third party in order for them to generate 
electricity from solar PV panels. The third party sells the electricity 
generated to the distribution company. In turn, the owner collects rent from 
the third party, after taking into account any other arrangements, like 
electricity purchase, profit-sharing, etc. Alternatively, the roof owner can 
get into a power purchase agreement (PPA) with the third party, in order to 
get electricity for their building at a lower rate;
o The maintenance of the system is handled by either the third-party developer 
or by the roof-top owner, depending on the agreement between them;
o The third-party developer enjoys government tax benefits and incentives as 
generator of clean power ;
o In the case of Afghanistan, DABS could also become the third-party so as to 
generate more grid-connected energy at a relatively low cost;;
To ensure long-term sustainability of roof-top solar PV systems, distribution companies 
purchasing power through net metering, for instance, shall need to ensure 
complementarities in power interface with the utility (DABS) grid, so that there is seamless 
integration with national power systems and management of local interconnection issues. 
Moreover, the financial health of the utility such as DABS is vital to secure revenues for the 
seller.
The institutional framework for roof-top solar is a mix between standalone captive systems 
and a grid-tied solar PV system. Like grid-tied systems, feed-in tariffs play an important 
role. At the same time, the model is based on a single consumer, similar to standalone 
systems. Afghanistan in currently establishing its net metering policy, which will catalyse 
the roof-top market. Figure below presents the model.
Globally, the European Union and especially Germany has been a proven leader in roof-top 
solar power development. In terms of regional success stories, roof-top solar PV schemes 
are popular in India and Sri Lanka within the South Asian region. In Sri Lanka, the net 
metering policy is open to all generators of renewable energy (hydropower, solar etc.) with 
a cap of 1,000 kW per user. The excess power sold to the grid is valued at the PPA and 
credited to the user in terms of energy credits, with the user to have flexibility on when 
user chooses to monetise them. In addition, countries where roof-top solar PV are present 
have introduced prior regulation to facilitate setting up of these systems.
#The German Roof-top success story
With a total generation of 36.6 terawatt-hours (TWh; equivalent to 36,600 GWh) from 
solar PV in 2015, and a total installed capacity of 29.6 GW (29,600 MW) exclusively 
through solar PV roof-tops, Germany has over 7% of its total electricity demand being 
fed by solar systems.
Germany’s solar roof-top installations are characterized by less than 10 kW units, 
mounted on the roof of a house. Beginning from a stage of negligible solar PV capacity 
in the 1990s, the country has targeted 45,000 GWh by 2020. Importantly, the approach 
puts importance on roof-top as a key enabler. Today, the roof-top segment contributes 
almost 75% of Germany’s PV capacity. Germany’s EnergieWiende claims that 
investments in solar PV have helped the economy phase out nuclear power plants.
Behind this significant success lies the Renewable Energy Guarantee Act that guarantees 
priority grid access to all electricity generated by renewables. In addition, policies 
significantly incentivize owners to mount solar roof-top systems, through Feed-in-Tariffs 
(FiT). While in the initial years the FiT was high so as to encourage homeowners to mount 
solar PV in their roof-tops, more recently (2014) the policy is tweaked to ensure 
auctioning of tariffs, which presents a more competitive picture.
As per German EnergieWiende, the opening up of the solar PV market also had significant 
co-benefits. These were in terms of employment generation, greening of the energy 
sector, combating climate change impacts in Germany and Europe. Being roof-top 
installed, the aesthetic appeal of the houses was also not hampered, since roof-top units 
are usually not visible from the ground.
#4.5 Renewable (Rural) Energy Service Company (RESCO)
#Description
RESCO is an entity that provides energy services to consumers in a particular area by setting 
up a mini-utility, usually in an off-grid location. As a mini-utility, RESCO combines both 
generation and distribution functions. The RESCO business model is built on enhancing 
community level incomes through reliable and affordable energy access. These incomes pay 
for energy consumed, sustaining the micro-utility function.
In the Afghanistan context, there are several areas where the national utility (DABS) may 
encounter difficulty in providing reliable electricity access. These are pockets best served 
by decentralised, renewable energy based systems. RESCO projects, acting as a complete 
micro-or mini-utility by combining generation and distribution services under a single roof, 
can meet power demand and contribute to local growth by facilitating enterprise 
development. 
Thus, RESCO models are more relevant in areas characterized by high levels of unmet 
demand for energy, usually for agriculture (irrigation), farm-based enterprises (cold storage 
and drying) and anchor loads (24x7 demand such as telecom, market centers and hospitals) 
along with high population densities.
#Salient features
The broad features of the RESCO business model are as follows:
• The RESCO mirrors a utility on the ground. Typically, RESCO sets up a cluster of 
projects in a district to reduce management overheads and ensure viability. RESCO 
businesses undertake several pre-project activities such as site selection, load and 
enterprise development, feasibility study preparation and engineering design. For 
power generation, RESCO utilizes locally available RE resources such as solar, 
biomass and wind.;
• Power is sold to consumers across all load categories, viz. household, commercial 
(shops) and enterprises. ;
• RESCOs are assisted by local entities such as Civil Society Organizations (CSO) and 
other community based organizations. These entities play important roles in project 
identification, community mobilization, load development and tariff fixation. CSOs, 
largely being local, build trust bridges between RESCO and communities. Security 
and other administrative support relevant in the local context are managed by the 
RESCO with the support of CSO / local partner.;
• To ensure long-term sustainability of operations, RESCOs can ensure 
complementarities in interface between the mini-grids constructed by them and the 
utility (DABS) grid, so that there is seamless integration with the national grid as and 
when it reaches in future.;
• From a financing perspective, RESCOs are often implemented as public-private 
partnerships with government agencies (MRRD, MEW etc.) providing support to 
RESCOs to reduce their risk exposure levels.;
• One of the key aspects leading to the success of a RESCO is the presence of an anchor 
load. An anchor load is defined as a load type that can provide sustained demand for 
power generated from the RESCO project. Other intermittent or seasonal loads can 
then be built around the anchor load to provide stability and higher levels of capacity
utilization. For instance, telecom towers have 24x7 demand and can act as anchor 
loads. Another good example is that of cold storages that need power round the 
clock. ;
• Significant benefits to the community (as consumers) accrue through a RESCO project 
through sustainable energy access, especially for enterprise development. This also 
leads to economic growth in the nearby region. With a “clustering” approach, district 
level impacts are also possible.;
• RESCO benefits from revenues earned by powering various loads in the area under 
its command. It also forges a long-term relationship with communities in the region, 
which will help to scale up the business to other locations. The RESCO also gains 
knowledge of various aspects of an energy-based business.;
• Benefits to government accrue through provision of environmentally sustainable 
energy in un-electrified areas, thereby complementing government efforts.;
The RESCO business model has strong potential in Afghanistan, mostly because decentralised 
energy is expected to contribute significantly in the country’s overall energy sector. In the 
process of setting up the RESCO, the following institutional roles are envisaged:
• Regulator: The regulator shall demarcate regions within Afghanistan where grid may 
not reach in a certain foreseeable future. These shall ring-fence zones where RESCO 
can operate. It would also open up the market for private sector players to act as 
potential RESCOs. ;
• Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) & Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation & 
Development (MRRD): As RESCOs are widely expected to be set up in rural
ecosystems, MRRD would play an important role in institutionalizing this business 
model in all its energy programmes. MEW will set up guidelines for technical design, 
safety and quality of power delivered for RESCO projects. MEW shall also carry out 
capacity building activities for RESCOs. MRRD can empanel potential RESCO 
organizations and work in tandem with relevant Community Development Councils 
and other grassroots organizations to identify RESCO project opportunities. Capacity 
development of RESCOs can also be jointly taken up by the two ministries along with 
DABS.;
• Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS): DABS shall, as the transmission utility, lay 
down guidelines for interconnection of distribution networks for mini-utilities
projects with the grid, so as to facilitate seamless transition in the event of grid 
interface. DABS shall build capacities of RESCOs on technical and commercial aspects 
of the distribution business including billing, metering and collection activities.;
• RESCO: The role of the RESCO encompasses building, operating and maintaining the 
micro-utility ecosystem throughout the life of the PPAs signed with various 
consumers.;
• Consumers: Enter into agreement with RESCO and pay tariffs as agreed upon.
With this above background, the following diagram shows a flow diagram of how the RESCO 
is expected to operate.
In Afghanistan, RESCO projects are assumed to be in the 100 kW – 1,000 kW range, in terms 
of installed capacity. A typical RESCO project is expected to cover 3 – 7 villages, thereby 
connecting between 1,000 - 2,000 households or roughly 6,000 – 15,000 individuals. This 
scale is higher than normal RESCO projects in the South Asian region (which vary between
10 kW – 500kW). One major reason behind this is that a number of districts and rural areas 
are expected to remain disconnected from the national grid, thereby allowing larger scale 
RESCO projects.
Global success on RESCO projects is based upon private enterprise in off-grid locations, 
where entrepreneurship sets up its own micro-utility to provide electricity solutions. More 
prevalent is the diesel generator operator, who functions as an energy service provider using 
diesel generator sets, essentially providing lighting energy to markets in Asia and Africa. 
In India, the Rockefeller Foundation has been at the center of empowering rural 
communities with environmentally sustainable energy supply options through the wellknown SPEED programme.
#The SPEED Story
Smart Power for Environmentally-sound Economic Development (SPEED), an initiative by the 
Rockefeller Foundation to connect remote, rural households in India with renewable energy 
based systems.
The SPEED model is structured around empowering enterprises, and is built around the 
concept of anchor loads. Anchor loads allow a generating station to perform at higher levels 
of capacity utilization. The programme sought to support Energy Service Companies (ESCO) 
to enter the rural energy market, a segment marked with high transaction costs relative to 
volume.
Over the past 6 years since 2010, the SPEED programme (and now its successor the Smart 
Power for Rural Development) has worked with over 50 ESCO organisations, contributing to 
its goal to energize 1,000 Indian villages 
with ‘smart power’.
The rural mini-grids are equipped with 
efficient LED lights, prepaid meters and 
tamper proof distribution networks that 
ensure safety and security. Several microenterprises have been energized, viz 
telecom towers, drying and processing 
units, small garment making businesses, 
cold storages, training centres and 
numerous shops. Agricultural pumping has 
also been a major beneficiary.
#4.6 Pay-as-you-go or Micro-finance based standalone systems
A stand-alone solar PV system is a modular, photovoltaic-based electrification system that 
provides amenity power for a captive consumer, typically a household. Being modular in 
nature, the stand-alone system is often designed to suit the needs of the customer. The 
business model sustains on providing reliable, easy-to-afford energy access at the household 
level. Using pay-as-you-go or microfinance based financing models, these systems provide
basic electricity supply at negligible upfront costs. For affluent users, larger and more 
sophisticated systems can be introduced.
There are several versions and variants that may be adapted for stand-alone models. This 
section shall attempt to highlight some of the best practices followed globally, seeking to 
capture the various nuances involved in these systems. 
#Salient features
Overall, the following salient features broadly describe the stand-alone, home based solar 
PV systems business model:
• Stand-alone systems are provided as either one-time outright purchase or a hire-topurchase or a pay-as-you-go model. Hire-to-purchase as well as pay-as-you-go models 
have sequenced ownership rights.;
• The model may typically comprise a technical entity (who could be the manufacturer 
itself) entrusted with the design of systems, and a implementation partner who 
identifies and engages with end users. Optionally, a financial intermediary may be 
involved. ;
• Stand-alone models are typically characterized by the presence of ICT enabled, 
‘smart’ features. These may include systems that are integrated with central servers 
through Radio Frequency tags, prepaid usage, “black box” designs etc. ;
• The models exhibit optimal and efficient energy use devices such as LED lights, 
energy efficient fans, multi-function devices (chargeable lantern–cum–torch–cum–FM 
radio; or a hand-cranked or bicycle powered battery to provide supplementary 
charge). These features also make the stand-alone device a lifestyle tool. ;
• In order to cater to a large number of customers, the routes to market adoption for 
stand-alone systems often involve innovative channels. While most manufacturers 
use the NGO – community based organization (CBO) route, there are other models 
that have utilized existing distribution channels for petroleum products (Reliance 
Solar), or linking with education programmes (Kotak Urja) in India, or selling energy 
coupled to other infrastructure services such as water (as done by Grundfos in 
Africa39). Yet, others have developed their own dealer-distributor networks.;
• To ensure scale up of stand-alone home-based systems a financing partner is needed. 
The partner partly resolves cash flow issues for the end user and the technical 
partner or the implementing agency. Typically, the financing partner extends microcredit to the user. Financing of the systems by the technical partner and/or 
implementing agency is also common. As these systems replace fossil fuels such as 
kerosene, the financing terms are tuned to ensure that financial savings from avoided 
fuel expenses are utilized to pay monthly lease rentals for the stand-alone systems. 
In addition, there are significant advantages in terms of avoided indoor emissions 
from kerosene use, in addition to GHG emission reductions.;
• Stand-alone models are often implemented as public-private partnerships, with the 
government providing investment support to implementing partners. These forms a 
win-win solution for government who are unable to extend the main grid to remote 
areas.;
• Communities (as consumers) accrue significant benefits through a stand-alone 
system from household energy access, especially for education and improving the 
quality of life for the family. ;
• Implementing agencies and technical partners benefit from accessing a larger user 
base. In deferred payment models, user charges typically run for 60–84 months, 
within which the user has invariably increased its demand so as to ask for a second–
or a larger–system. In presence of microfinance agencies in the SS model, such trends 
are significantly more pronounced. ;
Unlike other business models, the stand-alone system market does not require much
regulatory provisions: broadly this market is characterized by transaction between a service 
provider (commonly the implementing agency) and a customer. However, there are 
strategic roles played by institutional players that determine the success of this market. 
These are outlined below:
• Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW): MEW can set up guidelines for household scale 
systems, specifying technical design, safety and power delivered from a given 
system. MEW can also carry out capacity building activities for implementing 
agencies and provide support to technical partners. ;
• Microfinance (MF) or financing entity: The financing entity often holds the key to 
any large-scale programme. The role of the MF entity is typically to ensure that cash 
flows are positive for the implementing entity (typically the intermediary who as the 
implementing agency is the interface between the manufacturer and user). At the 
same time, by providing upfront cash for the systems on behalf of the seller, the MF 
enters into a financing agreement with the end user, allowing him to make small 
repayments every month. In pay-as-you-go systems, the financing entity may finance 
the implementing agency with a debt-equity combination, which de-risks the 
implementer from delayed payments. The user, who is not financed, pays off for the 
system every month through user charges. These charges typically run for 60 – 84 
months, following which the user owns the asset;
• The Implementing Agency: This agency plays a central role in putting together the 
entire programme. At the sourcing end, it interacts with financial institutions to 
ensure microfinance and other financial tie-ups. At the same time, it works closely 
with manufacturers to ensure that devices being sold cater to the needs of the 
consumers. Finally, it controls the operational aspects of the programme to ensure 
smooth performance, absence of leakages (systems being sold to wrong end-users, 
stolen, or traded internally for arbitrage etc.). Crucially, the implementing agency 
is responsible for overall after-sales service and maintenance performance of the 
programme as well. In many cases, the implementing agency is multi-tiered: 
involving two or three levels. Large programmes (at a national level) require an apex 
entity, supported by entities at the provincial level such as NGOs or CSOs;
• Consumers: Consumers can be simple end-users, who can undertake outright 
purchase of a system. They can also participate in the programme under a deferred 
payment or a pay-as-you-go model.;
The schematic flowchart above outlines the overall process and identifies roles and 
responsibilities of various stakeholders in a simplified version of the standalone system.
In the Afghanistan context, stand-alone solar PV has been widely in use across rural areas, 
driven largely by lack of options for electricity supply. Most of these systems are assembled 
out of imported components or systems from neighbouring countries. As a result, these units 
usually are not certified, and could be of questionable quality.
Stand-alone devices are expected to have significant impact in Afghanistan in the years to 
come, especially with participation from microfinance agencies. As a result, the 
implementation of the business models for stand-alone systems could also have far-reaching 
impacts. Perceived as a low-risk intervention and already present in the local markets, 
various agencies are in the process of introducing state-of-the-art stand-alone systems for 
the Afghan market, through a financial intermediary.
The implementation of business models requires generic as well as specific support in 
terms of policy readiness, financing, technical-cum-managerial capacities among 
others. These ecosystem enablers are critical for initiation and sustainability of 
business models. The next chapter of the Roadmap presents these enablers and their 
role in stage-wise development and maturity of RE markets.
#The Azuri Pay-as-you-go Model in Sub-Saharan Africa
The Azuri model, called the Indigo Duo solar home system is a simple kit with a 2.5 Wp 
PV module and a 3,300 mAh battery, connected to two LED lights (60 lumens each), and 
the Indigo controller (the black box). The battery and the controller are housed in the 
black box with a keypad (see picture). 
The black box allows power in the sockets only when the system has been recharged using 
a valid code provided to the user. This code is obtained when the user makes a payment, 
typically for a one-week or four-week duration. 
The business model works through distribution channels as Azuri does not have any direct 
sales strategy. Hardware and services are sold to distribution partners, say in Sub Saharan 
Africa. Distributors are trained in the 
Azuri system, and they are demarcated 
areas of coverage. The cloud based Azuri 
database stores details of all distributors 
and consumers, providing each and every 
consumer with a unique ID (like a serial 
number).
For the user, there are eighty instalment 
payments after purchase of his system. 
Each of the payments contributes 
something towards the cost of the 
system. After expiry of the installments, 
the system becomes free at the hands of 
the user.
#5 ENABLERS AND ACTIONS FOR MARKET DEVELOPMENT- A STAGE GATE APPROACH 
Development of RE markets is often a stage - wise process wherein each stage is the outcome 
of policy directions and actions facilitated by government, and the resultant responses from 
the private sector and other engaged stakeholders. Each stage thus requires broad-based as 
well as targeted enablers for various technologies and business models to develop and 
mature. The Stage-gate model as explained below, facilitates an understanding of these 
enablers. 
#5.1 Stage-Gate model for market development – look back to move ahead
The stage-gate model is technically understood as a management technique in which an 
initiative or a project is divided into stages, separated by gates. At each gate, the approach 
is ‘look back to move ahead’. In other words, the continuation of the initiative is contingent 
upon certain conditions to be met, review to be done, risks to be assessed at each gate, and 
then an informed decision to be taken to move ahead to the next stage. 
In the current context, the RE market in Afghanistan would follow three (3) stages: market 
seeding to market creation and then to market transformation, with each stage being built 
on certain enablers (technical, regulatory/ policy, financial/ economical and institutional 
or related to capacities) that are put in place. As mentioned earlier, there are some 
overarching enablers that are required for the entire RE sector per se, but there are also 
specific and targeted actions that need to be undertaken for specific technologies and 
business models to grow. This chapter 
discusses the Stage- Gate model as 
applicable to Afghanistan, followed by a 
discussion on overarching as well as 
targeted enablers and actions for each 
stage of the market development. 
Figure 29 presents the Stage-Gate 
framework of the above-discussed 
approach. As shown in the graph, the StageGate figure juxtaposes capacity additions in 
renewable energy over time, so as to 
demonstrate the trajectory of growth of 
the energy sector circa 2032.
5.1.1 Market seding & Stage - Gate 1 (SG1)
The Stage- Gate 1 is the successful completion of the first stage representing seeding of the 
RE market. This stage is characterized by the following: 
• This stage builds upon existing experience in the country on renewable energy and proof 
of concept for some RE technologies that have not been tried at all or at the scale that 
the Roadmap suggests. ;
• The thematic focus remains on identifying tried-and-tested technologies, together with 
the processes, in terms of policies and guidelines and initiating a few pilots to seed the 
markets.;
• Increase in installed capacities for technologies identified as highly applicable in 
Afghanistan in the current context (as shown in Table 10 in chapter 3). This includes 
solar PV, mini and micro hydro technologies, and wind power. ;
• In terms of specific technology applications, the highest focus remains on utility scale 
power projects, whether installed as a power park or as IPPs. Other important 
contributions are from mini-grids (solar as well as hydro) and stand-alone solar PV. ;
• New technologies to be piloted include waste to energy, roof-top solar, stand-alone solar 
for strategic applications such as telecom tower and pumping, solar thermal applications 
and domestic cooking using improved cookstoves and biogas. ;
• This stage is supported by government and partner (donor) funds as the market is still 
premature and needs structural support. Details are discussed in chapter 6 on ‘Costing 
and Financing of Roadmap’;
• The market creation stage represents demonstration of ‘techno-commercial viability’
and confidence building of private sector. ;
• The focus shifts to setting up more projects in order to create the markets. In this stage, 
various business models are implemented and customized to achieve success in the 
Afghan context.;
• In addition to technologies that are initiated in SG1 and are now (expectedly) being 
implemented at a commercial scale, SG2 introduces new technologies such as CSP, 
Floatovoltaics, CPV, Biomass power generation, and geothermal energy particularly for 
heating applications. ;
• SG2 is still supported by grants and government support, but their share is expected to 
reduce, from almost 80% finance (as in SG1) to around 40%. This share is taken up by 
promoter’s equity, while the grant component could be redistributed as viability gap 
funding and other sources of low cost debt.;
• This stage represents market maturity and expansion, led by private initiative.;
• Stakeholders (mainly private sector, represented both by local and global) are fully 
familiar with the ground rules vis-à-vis RE markets in Afghanistan, and a number of 
enterprise models are operating to transform the sector to higher levels of growth.
• Government inputs and support are strategic in nature, focusing on newer technologies, 
newer policies and newer initiatives.;
• In this stage, grants may still exist for a few sunrise applications, but overall forms a 
small share of the pool of funds (15%). Promoter contributions exceed 50% with own 
equity, market debt and low-cost debt.;
As discussed at the beginning of the chapter, the essence of the Stage-Gate developmental 
model is the effective presence of enablers and actions. Sections below discuss the key 
enablers and actions required for meeting the targets through each of the three stages. The 
stages contain certain provisos, which if realized could translate into additional power 
generation and eventual contribution to the RENP policy target of 5,000 MW by 2032.
#5.2 Key enablers and actions 
#5.2.1 Policy readiness and programmatic support
One of the recurrent prerequisites discussed in the context of RE sector development is the 
need for policies and regulatory direction from the government. Among the landmarks 
achieved, Renewable Energy Policy for the country has been finalized. Another vital 
regulatory instrument is the Feed in Tariff Policy. In addition, Energy Investment Policy and 
others are also in the process of being approved.
While these policies provide a legal and regulatory framework for managing the overall 
energy and renewable energy domains, there is also a need for other specific enablers which 
include the following:
a. Programmatic guidelines (or Schemes) for promoting specific business 
models: National level programmatic guidelines for development of Solar (or 
Wind) Power Parks and for Distribution Franchisees shall unlock the markets for 
SPPs and pave way for distribution franchisee or mini-utilities in the country. The 
guidelines should include as a minimum - the definition; framework and 
processes; institutional roles and responsibilities; permissions, clearances and 
statutory requirements; power evacuation and financing mechanisms. 
b. Policy on mini-grids: A dedicated policy on mini-grids is required to kick-start 
this segment in Afghanistan. The policy should expectedly include the definition 
and description; technical standards and guidelines for designing, operating and 
maintaining the mini-grids; tariff methodologies; structure and roles for the 
energy service company (RESCO); regulations and incentives; and involvement of 
local enterprises, communities in sustaining the mini-grids. 
c. Regulatory guidance on power distribution and grid integration for off-grid 
systems: There is a need to provide guidelines for setting up of roof-top and offgrid power projects in a manner that would allow safe and seamless integration 
with the national grid when it reached these locations. 
d. Demarcation of areas for electrification through decentralised (localized) 
generation: Taking DABS’ proposed network as the starting point, districts or 
zones may be identified where power may be generated and consumed locally. 
These shall not only open the market for decentralised renewable energy 
projects, but also allow DABS to identify its own priority areas. It would also 
provide clear guidance for electrification efforts in Afghanistan.
e. Greening of strategic sectors: Telecommunication, agricultural pumping, 
transportation, food processing, buildings and construction, internal and border 
security, etc. are some of the strategic sectors that require reliable electricity. 
A scheme for promoting the use of RE in these sectors would create demand and 
provide the ‘pull’ for RETs in the country.
f. Incentives for use of solar hot water systems: As a part of Afghanistan building 
energy codes and regulations, use of solar hot water systems should be 
incentivized so that the dependence on electric or thermal heating systems for 
water is reduced. Some of the incentives would be discounts in monthly or yearly 
electricity bills, rebate on home loans, reduced property tax etc.
#5.2.2 Technological and technical support
g. Developing the RE resource atlas: While available RE resource maps that are 
developed by MEW are useful to conduct pre-feasibilities of projects, 
improvements such as demarcation of RE resources using time series data of key 
variables such as GHI, DNI (for solar), wind speeds, flow rates for MHP and SHPs 
shall enhance the quality of the maps. The preparation of RE atlas is thus an 
important action that need to start as early as possible to facilitate project 
developers in designing the projects in market creation stage. 
h. Testing and certification of systems and components: In order to ensure the 
quality and safety of RE systems and components, and to ensure the designed 
and expected performance, it is important to create a state-of-the-art national 
level testing and certification facility that could later be expanded at provincial 
levels. Existing efforts in this direction taken by the Afghanistan National 
Standards Authority (ANSA) may be complemented. 
i. Technical training and education: In order to provide a constant stream of 
educated and skilled workforce to sustain this sector, it is important to 
mainstream the RE education and skill development as a part of national level 
educational and vocational training infrastructure. A specialist organisation may 
also be set up, or existing institutions such as the Vocational Training Centre 
(VTC) strengthened, so as to meet this challenge in a systematic manner.
#5.2.3 Institutions and institutional framework
j. Independent regulatory agency: Role of the regulatory agency would be to 
introduce and guide regulations on various subjects such as tariffs, power access 
and transmission, determination of a national ‘grid code’, issuance of licenses 
for power generation and distribution operations. It can issue guidance on 
demarcated zones for decentralised and off-grid power generation, facilitate 
development of solar power parks, open access and power purchase / sales and 
so on. Thus, the regulatory agency shall be a key enabler in structuring the 
electricity sector and complement the efforts of the Ministry of Energy and 
Water.
k. Specialized institutions or Special Purpose Vehicles: These shall be formed to 
carry out activities specific to a sub-sector or project type. For instance, the 
Solar Power Park Developer (SPPD) may be entrusted with the task of setting up 
and managing solar PV parks. Similarly, there could be a dedicated entity 
managing the roof-top sector. These specialized bodies, set up under the aegis 
of the MEW can be given executive power, thereby according them ownership 
and responsibility.
l. Rural electricity utility: The rural electricity utility may be given responsibilities 
for generation, transmission and distribution exclusively in rural areas. In terms 
of ownership, the utility could be a public corporation or a government owned 
company. Given that most of rural Afghanistan is not connected to the national 
grid, a dedicated rural utility shall provide greater focus on meeting the rural 
power shortage scenario.
m. Dedicated financial institution: As the sector grows and enters the market 
creation stage, it would require a dedicated institution to generate and manage 80
funds for the implementation of RE projects. The institution will be developed 
to manage local as well as international grants and lines of credit. This shall 
create a basket-fund approach, in which development partners and other 
agencies can pool in resources and enable the entity to offer a string of financial 
solutions to suit various project types. The financial entity may empanel 
prospective project developers (private sector players, micro-finance 
companies, NGOs) who can avail of financial support through it.
n. Coordination mechanism and an oversight: coordination between institutions 
responsible for electricity generation, distribution and application is important 
for realizing the potential of RE in Afghanistan. Therefore, an effective 
coordination mechanism amongst these institutions is an important step to 
ensure synchronized development of the sector.
o. Institutional capacities on project planning, managing, monitoring and 
reporting: RE sector will grow on the shoulders of strong and capable national 
level institutions. Building and strengthening of institutions is therefore a prerequisite for developing RE sector in Afghanistan. Specifically, capacities need 
to be strengthened across MEW, MRRD and other key ministries and provincial 
governments on technical, managerial, administrative and financing aspects of 
RE projects. This would be a continuous process, as there would be a need to 
keep abreast with the latest developments in RE sector internationally and also 
to incorporate learnings from local as well as international experiences. 
p. National level awareness generation: since the success of RE sector depends on 
its effective uptake by various sections of the society and communities, it is 
critical to make them aware of and educate them about the use and benefits of 
RE systems. An all-encompassing and multi-stakeholder targeted national level 
campaign on RE is expected to help catalyze the growth of the sector.
#5.2.4 Access to finance
One of the key enablers for RE sector in Afghanistan is access to finance, which spans across 
all finance needs, viz. large, medium, small and micro. In this direction, the relative 
weakness in the Afghan domestic financial system implies that private resources are not 
readily available for investment in the renewable energy sector. 
As a result, the main sources of finance lie in the public domain. The RENP has rightly 
identified the unlocking of private capital as a means to finance investments in the 
renewable energy sector. Engagement of banking sector & investment finance can take 
place at the following levels:
q. Bank (Debt) Finance: Bank finance for large and medium scale projects in the 
renewable energy sector shall in-turn mobilize both private and public capital. 
Currently, most projects in this domain get supported by concessional donor 
funds and government contributions. Currently Afghan banks are more focused 
on retail operations, however donor or government guaranteed debt instruments 
can leverage additional capital. These can be utilized to expedite 
implementation of renewable energy projects, especially for solar power parks, 
larger RE technology projects and setting up of power distribution franchisees.
r. Microfinance: Primarily for micro scale projects at the user level, microfinance 
supported renewable energy projects has had significant success in ecosystems
similar to Afghanistan, across Asia and Africa. Similar potential exists here, with 
high levels of household energy demand for consumption as well as microenterprise development.
s. Working capital finance: In addition, working capital finance, which is currently 
available from Afghan banks for large businesses and industrial groups, is a 
potential enabler for easing the capital constraints of the RE market.
#5.2.5 Local manufacturing and enterprise development
t. Enterprise development: In a rural economy, enterprises form the backbone, 
supporting the economy with employment, trade and commerce. Enterprises also 
enable communities to adapt to climate-induced exigencies that lead to lower 
farm incomes and consequently higher climate vulnerability. From an energy 
security perspective, enterprises are a key enabler as they are able to utilise 
energy for productive applications, thereby generating incomes to sustain both 
the enterprise as well as the energy generation unit. 
There is a role for social enterprise incubators, who provide various value-add 
services such as sales and marketing tie-ups, advice on operating businesses and
start-up capital. In the Afghan context, the incubator landscape is dominated by 
donors and CSOs, which provide inputs to enterprise development. However, 
there is a need for strengthening enterprises as well as enterprise incubation 
services. Several government agencies, especially MRRD and MAIL (Ministry of 
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock), in collaboration with development 
partners, have set up incubators to facilitate rural enterprise development.
u. Support programme for local RE industry: since local industry is expected to 
provide the back-bone of RE sector in Afghanistan, it is important to design and 
implement a support programme for local manufacturers, system assemblers and 
others by way of enhancing their capacities, providing networking opportunities 
with international industry, access to technology and technical know-how, 
financial incentives, mentoring and incubation, involvement through regular 
consultations for policies and overall RE sector’s improvement etc.
v. Private – Public – Partnerships or PPP: The PPP model works on the premise of 
getting the best out of public and private sectors to work together for a common 
goal. While the public sector brings socially responsive pro-poor approach to 
project design, the private sector focuses on financial viability of the project. 
The PPP model also helps in developing the confidence of the private sector 
through risk sharing mechanism. 
With spatially distributed communities, PPP projects are especially an enabler in 
unlocking private capital for financing renewable energy projects in rural sector. 
This model is particularly pertinent in mini-grid sector where DABS along with a 
local RESCO can work together to build, operate and maintain (or transfer) minigrids, and in the process, builds the capacities of local enterprises to undertake 
such projects in future.
w. Fiscal and financial incentives for RE sector: while the sector will continue to 
benefit from already available support and incentives for the private sector led 
infrastructure projects, the RE sector would require customized fiscal and 
financial incentives particularly in terms of customs duty and import tax waivers.
5.2.6 Risk management
Management of risks is a key enabler in providing the right environment for stakeholders 
engaged in the sustainable energy sector. Although risks and their mitigants could be varied, 
broad risk classes are outlined below:
x. Mitigating business risks: Business risks include delays in import and 
transportation, absence of insurance or high insurance premium, lack or absence 
of skilled labor, risks of theft of plant and machinery (during transit, or during 
implementation / operation) etc. These risks, most of which are present in 
Afghanistan, can be mitigated by policy interventions and / or improvement in 
overall business environment.
y. Managing project risks: As distinct from business risks, project risks are intrinsic 
to the project location. These could include revenue risks arising from nonpayment of dues from consumers, cost overrun risks from delayed 
implementation, safety risks from possible accidents etc. Some of these risks 
overlap with business risks as well. Better project design and management will 
help in mitigating these risks. 
z. Addressing security risks: Finally, the delicate security situation in the country 
poses a risk as well. While the success of telecommunication in Afghanistan has 
indicated that rural infrastructure may not always be threatened by the security 
situation, the potential for disruption remains active. Direct mitigating measures 
include use of security, while more passive options could be to build trust capital 
with local communities as a means to counter subversive forces. 
Management of these risks reduces chances of project failure and are crucial for the success 
of the renewable energy sector in general.
The following table maps enablers along with the stage of implementation in terms of the 
applicable stage-gate when the enabler is expected to be introduced. 
Enablers as applied to relevant RE applications and business models are discussed in next 
section.
#5.3 Enablers for implementation of specific business models
This section breaks down some of the enablers outlined in the sections above, into enabling 
activities specific to the context of business models and technologies discussed in this 
Roadmap. 
#5.3.1 Enablers for Solar Power Parks
#5.3.2 Enablers for Distribution Franchisee
It is expected that Distribution Franchisee projects shall be implemented in urban and 
industrial areas of Afghanistan, although a modified version could be equally applicable for 
RESCO projects. Success factors and visibility of DF projects shall lead to greater 
proliferation of DF projects.
#5.3.3 Enablers for Roof-top solar
#5.3.4 Enablers for mini-grid and RESCO business model
#5.3.5 Enablers for microfinance supported stand-alone PV market
As discussed, the Stage-Gate framework of development is contingent upon the 
introduction and implementation of enablers, both overarching and specific to business 
models. An important enabler for the overall RE future development is related to 
availability of funds and financing instruments which are discussed in the next chapter
in details
6 COSTING AND FINANCING OF ROADMAP
The purpose of this chapter is to outline the framework that can be used to estimate initial 
costs for achieving Roadmap targets, and to outline mechanisms that can be used to reduce 
the cost to the government and international development partners by incentivizing 
investment by the private sector.
The RE market in Afghanistan is in infancy and hence there is no clear ‘market price’ for RE 
in Afghanistan. Wide variations in costs exist even amongst similar RE system configurations. 
This is a consequence of projects being grant funded by a wide variety of donors (with 
corresponding variations in standards, overheads, and costs), a small and fragmented 
market, the lack of focus on commercial sustainability, and an emphasis on system 
commissioning rather than on ongoing operations and maintenance.
A framework is designed for evaluating potential costs required to reach the targets of 
Stage- Gate I of this Roadmap. Costs for these RE technologies are estimated based on broad 
international benchmarks obtained from credible sources. The framework allows costs to be 
calculated by technology (e.g. Solar PV) and market (e.g. utility scale). It then outlines a 
mechanism to put in place financial instruments appropriate to the market type (i.e. utility 
scale, mini-grids, etc.). 
This framework is not technology specific, but does make note of the degree of maturity of 
these technologies in Afghanistan. This degree of maturity can be used to evaluate useful 
instruments for the current stage of the market and make efforts to put in place mechanisms 
that will be useful at future stages. The framework is geared towards maximizing the role 
and investment of the private sector, and targeting donor / government subsidies to that 
end. Private-sector led growth is both in line with the RENP (and economic development 
efforts more generally), and is cost-effective, as international experience suggests that a 
robust competitive private sector dominated market with effective regulation promotes the 
greatest market growth and lowest prices. 
In keeping with the overall structure of this Roadmap document, the goal is to move towards 
a liberalized energy market. To date, there has been very limited investment by private 
sector RE developers or commercial financial institutions, although surveys conducted 
suggest an interest and willingness provided risks are adequately addressed. The financing 
strategy is to gradually reduce the proportion of public investment in favour of higher share 
of investment by the private sector in the forms of viability gap funding, debt, equity, and 
various hybrid financing and risk mitigation products.
The framework is built upon deploying the right financial mechanisms based upon business 
model or market type (e.g. utility scale projects), and the stage of market development 
(e.g. market creation). The financial mechanisms are selected based upon the likely barriers 
being faced to private sector led market growth at that stage and are organized into three 
broad areas; subsidies and grants, risk reduction/ mitigation instruments, and climate 
change related funds / mechanisms.
#6.1 RE benchmark costs and global cost trends
Globally, RE prices have dropped consistently over the past few years, a trend that is
expected to continue for at least the next decade. Future costs for renewable energy will 
depend on a variety of inter-related factors including technological advancement, market 
expansion and regulatory action. However, the core premise is that costs will reduce as the 88
market expands, which is supported by international experience. The following figure shows 
the trends in utility scale solar PV auctions throughout the world. It is clearly visible that 
the prices are going down at a rapid rate. 
In fact, utility scale solar PV is even achieving parity with fossil fuel (coal) based systems in 
some countries. As an illustrative example, the figure below shows how the tariffs bid by 
developers (the price) has changed as the installed capacity for utility scale PV has increased 
(market expansion) in India :
Global PV utility scale costs and wind power costs are expected to halve over the next
decade. Biomass and hydropower, as mature technologies, are not expected to fall too much 
in prices. However, based upon current technological trends and research, prices for the 
core mini-grid system are predicted to drop by over 50% in the next twenty years.
New tenders (particularly in the Middle East) also reveal such low prices. While it remains 
to be seen if projects bid at these rates will be financially viable (and it should be noted 
that complex financing and PPA structures can make this published cost difficult to 
compare), these projects do point to the potential for cost savings given a mature market. 
#6.2 RE costs in Afghanistan
To establish the cost baseline in the absence of an established market in Afghanistan, costs 
for reference systems were procured from local RE organizations. In the case of solar PV, 
the AREU was asked to provide quotations for systems in each of the proposed markets (1 
MW with no storage (utility scale market), 100 kW with some storage (mini-grid market), 
and 10 kW stand alone with battery backup (large household system market). The graph 
below shows unit costs (USD/ Watt) for solar PV systems of different configurations, as 
provided by the AREU.
Solar panel costs were broken out separately, while other costs were grouped within the 
categories of other equipment, other costs, and government costs for sake of comparison
as shown below. It should also be noted that land costs and security costs are not included 
as these are highly variable and site specific. 
Other equipment:
Inverters, batteries, PV panel stands, battery racks, grounding, cabling, 
safety ropes, nuts, and bolts and other miscellaneous minor equipment 
required for plant construction;
Other costs:
Equipment transport to site, management and administration charges, site 
labour charges, site design and civil works and other miscellaneous design and 
site preparation costs.;
Government costs:
Taxes and permitting fees;
It appears that economies of scale are present in panel costs (as evidenced by lower panel 
unit costs as system sizes increase). However, quotations received indicate that the greater 
system complexity including additional charge controllers required for a mini-grid as 
compared to a home system negate these economies of scale when overall costs are 
considered. In contrast, the lack of storage (battery costs are approximately 40% of the 
equipment cost for home systems and 30% for mini-grids) and simpler configurations 
required for a utility scale system result in overall unit costs below 50% as compared to 
home systems and mini-grids.
When compared to global and regional benchmarks, it was found that costs are higher in 
Afghanistan. Higher equipment costs are likely a reflection both of higher transportation 
and logistics costs as well as of a smaller market and the lack of intense competition for 
large utility-scale projects. The higher labour costs reflect the lack of skilled technical 
labour available for large-scale installations, which can be partially addressed by training 
programs.
The proportion of costs (as shown below) for utility-scale systems in India and Afghanistan 
is similar, even though the logistics, market, and tax regime in India are different to
Afghanistan. It suggests that a reduction in taxes, other supportive policies and an expanded 
market has the potential to drive costs down across both equipment and labour costs.
Following scenario/developments will lead to rapid cost reductions in future:
• Rapid progress towards integration into international RE market enabling country to 
benefit from regional economies of scale;
• Rapid improvement in logistics costs due to improved infrastructure particularly 
towards sites for large utility-scale projects;
• Positive regulatory environment, established track record and significantly reduced 
Afghanistan risk premium;
#6.3 Cost of achieving Stage-Gate I target
The global costs mentioned in previous section have provided a basis for estimating the costs 
per MW of generation capacity for the various proposed technologies in Afghanistan. The 
assessment is limited to the cost of constructing and commissioning RE equipment and does 
not include costs for transmission/distribution grid infrastructure, materials/equipment 
replacement and O&M costs. The assessment also does not consider the land and security 
costs required. These costs vary markedly across the country, and in many deployments land 
and security will either be provided by the government, the community or owners’ 
associations (as in the case of industrial parks).
Stage- Gate I represent the phase when technology deployment is at a nascent stage and 
projects are generally intended to confirm the sufficient availability of natural resource 
(e.g. wind availability at the site) or to demonstrate technical viability and refine standard 
designs through pilot projects. Private-sector led capital investment at this stage is often 
challenging, and faces the barriers of a lack of confidence in the natural resource and (once 
the resource potential is established) confidence in the techno-economic viability of the 
project. 
The table below provides an indication of what costs might be based upon international
benchmarks provided above to give an indication of the scale of investments required to 
reach the roadmap targets in Stage- Gate I. However, as it should be noted again that these 
costs represent broad global averages rather than Afghanistan specific costs. Further, these 
costs represent a wide range of sites, financing, and market conditions, and often consist 
of only ‘core’ costs (not including distribution, O&M, capacity building, etc.). Nevertheless, 93
applying these broad benchmarks suggests that the overall capital costs to achieve the 
roadmap targets in Stage- Gate I will be around 500 million USD.
#6.4 Financing of Roadmap
The sections above on costing outlined a framework to estimate the range of costs for 
deploying RE technology/market combinations as per the Roadmap targets. This section
outlines a framework to judge and put in place financing instruments appropriate to the 
market type (e.g. utility scale, mini-grid) and stage of expansion, but is not technologyspecific. It should also be noted that these financing mechanisms are only one aspect of a 
robust private sector. This chapter does not discuss financing modalities for the broader 
infrastructure for the energy sector that must be built (such as transmission infrastructure), 
nor does it discuss financing of improved logistics, security, etc. 
#6.5 Framework for financing 
The framework for suitable financing actions is aligned with the broader Roadmap 
framework that approaches RE development in terms of technologies, markets and stages. 
At each of these stages (market seeding, market creation, market expansion), the market 
tends to be dominated by particular project types (e.g. resource assessments and pilot 
projects tend to occur during the market seeding stage). These activities, particularly when 
attempted by the private sector, face risks and barriers. Each of these barriers is targeted 
by financial mechanisms, which are organized into grants / subsidies and risk mitigation 
mechanisms. Funding for these mechanisms is the form of instruments (e.g. grants through 
the newly-announced Citizens’ Charter Program). This approach is outlined below:
#6.6 Funding instruments and mechanisms 
In this analysis, climate fund instruments are called out separately due to their particular 
applicability to renewable energy. Risks and barriers to RE development have been 
previously discussed in the policy framework for RE development (the RENP) and are unique 
to a particular market and stage of development, and a brief definition of the types of 
financial mechanisms46 is provided below:
#Subsidy/Grant:
These are monetary benefits given to private sector participants and 
consumers so as to reduce the financial impact of commissioning and maintaining RE 
projects. The purpose of these mechanisms is to recognize and address commercial issues 
that can make a RE project unviable if the only funding available was from the private 
sector. These can include generation-based capital subsidies (where grants are provided to 
project developers for commissioning plants), ongoing Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) or 
Feed-in-Tariff subsidies (where monies are provided based upon ongoing generation) or 
concessional finance (where monies are used to provide a cheaper source of capital such as 
equity or debt to RE developers). 
The payment of the grant or subsidy is linked wherever possible to outputs; a certain 
capacity installed or energy generated over time. To date, the financing ecosystem for 
renewable energy in Afghanistan has been almost completely dominated by grants. 
Instruments under this mechanism include design-build or design-build-operate contracts 
financed by international development agencies, grants for infrastructure such as under the 
NSP (and by the newly-launched Citizens’ Charter Programs) and funding by NGOs. An 
overview of some of these types of grant/subsidy funding mechanisms is provided below:
#Risk mitigating instruments:
These are insurance and risk mitigation mechanisms that are 
guaranteed by public (e.g. donor or government) monies but which are paid out not in the 
normal course of commercial business, but during a specified non-business event. The 
purpose of these mechanisms is to recognize and address non-commercial risks that prevent 
private sector participants from investing. These mechanisms and events include resource 
risk guarantees (paid out when exploratory or resource assessment investigations by the 
private sector fail to uncover sufficient natural resource potential such as geothermal basin 
heat capability); political / sovereign risks (e.g. political insurrection) and to serve as reinsurance for commercial insurers. 
While risk mitigation financial mechanisms have not yet been used in the renewable energy 
industry in Afghanistan, they are being attempted in areas such as natural-gas fired power 
generation. Risk mitigation instruments are usually provided by development banks such 
as the World Bank Group and the Asian Development Bank.
#Climate funds:
These are financial mechanisms / monetary incentives specifically designed 
to increase the penetration of climate friendly technologies. Although in practice they can 
take the form of a subsidy or risk mitigation mechanism, they are called out here separately 
as they are specific to RE development. There are a variety of climate funding opportunities 
that serve different purposes and which are designed to be deployed at particular stages of 
market evolution. Pilot projects and programs have previously accessed climate funding, 
and larger integrated programs have applied for funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF).
#6.7 Financing approaches for different stages of development
#Stage 1: market seeding
This is when technology deployment is at a nascent stage and projects are generally 
intended to confirm the sufficient availability of natural resource (e.g wind availability at 
the site) or to demonstrate technical viability and refine standard designs through pilot 
projects. Private-sector led capital investment at this stage is often challenging, and faces 
the barriers of a lack of confidence in the natural resource and (once the resource potential 
is established) confidence in the techno-economic viability of the project. 
The type of direct grant funding that has been traditionally employed by development 
partners in Afghanistan is useful at this stage. Public grant money also has a role to play in 
helping ensure that any results or lessons learned from resource assessments are shared as 
well as helping to provide legitimacy (by assisting with certification and monitoring) for 
resource assessments. Certification and legitimacy of resource assessments and pilot 
project results also help provide proof points that give confidence for the private sector to 
begin investing in projects, and for commercial banks to provide financing.
Rather than a direct grant, a resource risk guarantee can be useful in instances where 
there is the possibility of pursuing an integrated strategy with a project developer for 
resource assessment and an initial commercial project (e.g. the private developer agrees to 
perform the geothermal resource assessment at a site, and if successful, then develop the 
site into a commercial project). A resource risk guarantee is structured such that if the 
initial resource investigation proves to be unviable, the resource risk guarantee 
compensates the developer for all or part of the cost of the resource investigation.
With regard to climate funds appropriate mechanisms at this stage are those that focus on 
technology transfer and can be mobilized quickly. The Climate Technology Centre and 
Network (CTCN) and Poznan Technology Transfer mechanisms are designed for this purpose.
#Stage 2: market creation 
At this point, natural resource availability and technical viability have been established, and 
technology application is no longer new to the country as a result of multiple pilot projects. 
The focus at this stage is demonstrating that the designs and business models developed 
during pilot projects of the Market Seeding stage can be scaled and replicated. Private 
sector entities at this stage start exhibiting interest in mechanisms apart from pure grantfunded contracting (as is normally the case in the pilot projects of the previous phase). 
The barriers faced to private-sector led growth revolve around longer-term viability such as 
continued O&M and cost recovery (initial technical and financial viability having been 
established) and the perception of risk regarding political climate and security. 
Grant / subsidy mechanisms chosen at this stage are selected to let the market decide the 
level of risk that private sector entrants are willing to bear. It is possible that subsidies will 
still need to be offered to elicit private sector interest (especially in markets where 
electricity tariffs are regulated) and will involve some combination of subsidies for capital 
investment and for ongoing operation. It is recommended that subsidies/grants be explicitly 
linked to effective output; such as payment upon some defined capacity commissioned and 
certified, or linked to per unit of continued energy production. The government has the 
opportunity to incentivize developers through mechanisms that forego revenue but increase 
the market; tax holidays for profits and import duty exemptions for equipment. It is also 
recommended that market mechanisms be used to determine the level of subsidy required 
through strategies such as auctions for the level of capital subsidy and PPA tariff. In the 
recent 10 MW Kandahar solar project, an element of this model has already proved 
successful; the PPA tariff that DABS would pay to the developer was decided based upon a 
reverse auction, while the capital subsidy was decided up-front. The next stage could be 
the use of a reverse auction mechanism for both the capital subsidy and the PPA tariff.
The subsidy demanded by the market can be further reduced (and more private sector 
entrants enticed) through the use of risk mitigation products. Development organizations 
such as the World Bank, ADB, and OPIC provide these instruments, with variations for 
required eligibility (OPIC’s mechanisms are in place to aid US businesses). These 
instruments provide a guarantee for specified recompense in the event of a defined political 
event or in the event that the government utility cannot make good on its commitments. 
To ensure that the government also has protection, the contract terms of the IPP can specify 
that the asset will pass to DABS in the event of independently-assessed non-performance.
Climate funds at this stage of market evolution should be targeted towards programs rather 
than individual projects. Larger funding packages such as those available from the GCF can 
build upon the proof points and lessons from the pilot programs commissioned during the 
market seeding stage to propose programmatic interventions. Conceivably, the results from 
one climate-funded initiative can be used to apply for funding from another source; using a 
CTCN intervention for initial technology transfer and assistance, Global Environment Facility 
(GEF) or Climate Investment Funds (CIF) funds to build upon CTCN, and using these results 
to form the basis for a GCF proposal.
#Stage 3: market expansion
At this stage, the market has been proven and viable combinations of technical designs and 
business models are in place. The focus at this stage is to select financial structures to 
reduce the cost deploying systems in the commercial market. Grant / subsidy mechanisms 
are selected to assure demand, either through standardized FITs (again auctioned where 
possible) and access to concessional finance. In mature markets, government mechanisms 
are formed (such as IREDA in India) that allow concessional finance funds (from government 
funds and institutions such as the ADB, World Bank and KfW) to be pooled and accessed by 
project developers. In the case of Afghanistan, it will also be necessary to align these 
instruments with Islamic Finance principles where required. With regard to risk mitigation, 
it is anticipated that in a mature market, a project developer will be able to access 
conventional sources of project insurance; and should an Afghanistan risk premium persist, 
re-insurance sponsored by multilateral agencies can reduce this premium. Climate funding 
(if available) is past the pilot, scale-up and market creation mechanisms and takes the form 
of active trading of carbon credits.
The framework as applied to the three roadmap market types (utility scale, mini-grid and 
stand-alone) is presented below, along with an assessment of the current maturity of 
technologies in each of these markets.
#6.7.1 Financing framework applie to the Utility Scale market segment
“Utility Scale” systems are typically characterized by larger projects that feed to the grid 
and sell bulk power, typically on a per unit (KWh) basis. During the market seeding stage, 
private sector developers face the risk of unknown natural resource potential at the site 
(which in turn can affect generation and revenue) as well as technical risks including the 
ability to connect and inject power into the grid. At this stage, grant funding is useful to 
help locate suitable sites with natural resource potential and required infrastructure, and 
fund resource assessments, as well as for studies that demonstrate that generated power 
can be evacuated by the grid. 
To establish a track record of successful operation in areas of perceived increased risk, 
initial projects in the country are likely to be grant funded. Since the electricity sale is 
usually to the utility, capacity building and technical assistance to train utility personnel in 
effectively managing the introduction of private sector power into the grid may also be 
useful. As mentioned, in some cases (such as geothermal development), private sector 
participants may be willing to fund resource assessments as part of an integrated strategy 
that leads to development if they are compensated in the event of the resource not being 
sufficient for commercial development. 
During the market creation stage, initial technical viability has been established and the 
focus is on sustaining operations and revenue. In many instances, the cost of generating 
power is higher than that of other sources of grid supply (such as imported power from 
Central Asia) and the regulated prevailing user tariff. Public monies will then be required 
to fill this ‘viability gap’ between the unit cost of generating renewable energy for the 
developer and a per-unit revenue (tariff) realized by the utility. To reduce the overhead 
costs of development and limit the developers’ risk to the extent possible to technical 
generation of power, public monies are also useful to develop ‘Renewable Energy Parks’ 
wherein suitable site selection, ancillary infrastructure and security are arranged for by the 
government. 
Technical assistance to the government to effectively manage private sector participants 
(such as the structuring of contracts and tariff mechanisms) is also useful to safeguard the 
interests of the government and consumers. Since the electricity is sold to one customer 
(the utility), the risks a private sector investor faces include default or non-payment on the 
part of the utility/government. As mentioned previously, instruments exist to insure the 
developer against non-payment by the government or defined political risks.
During the market expansion stage, the focus is on expanding the variety and scope of 
finance available to private sector developers as well as to ensure continued demand for 
renewable energy. A model that has proved successful in the region is for the government 
to set up a pooled finance mechanism for renewable energy development that is structured 
to accept concessional finance from development agencies and in turn lend (after 
appropriate due diligence) to project developers at favourable rates. In some cases, this 
finance can take the form of an equity stake rather than debt. 
The risk of insufficient demand can be reduced by transparent policies by the government 
to commit to renewable energy targets through mechanisms such as renewable purchase 99
obligations, which compel government agencies (and in some cases large industrial and 
commercial consumers) to source a certain percentage of their power from renewable 
sources. With regard to risk mitigation, the risk guarantee instruments that insure against 
political risk or non-performance by the utility can continue to be useful, as can 
international development agencies facilitating access to commercial insurance.
#6.7.2. Financing framework applied to the Mini-grid market segment
The mini-grid market shares some similarities with the utility scale market (such as the 
project type) but also has several important differences. For one, the barriers to successful 
commercial operation rely on effective revenue collection and buy-in from a group of (often 
rural) consumers, rather than bulk sales to the grid. Systems are smaller and unless methods 
of aggregating assets into a portfolio are implemented and partnerships with local banks 
formed, the small scale of financing requirements often makes the cost of due diligence and 
oversight problematic for multilateral development agencies and larger commercial banks. 
The distributed / rural nature of many operations also presents challenges in terms of 
directing financing appropriately towards system sustainability. Finally, site selection must 
be coordinated with grid expansion plans so that systems do not become unviable due to 
competition from cheaper grid power. 
During the market seeding stage, grant funding is useful for site-specific resource 
assessments, technology transfer and technical assistance, and capacity building both 
amongst the mini-grid operators and the local community. The emphasis at this point is to 
use public monies to refine the business model, select appropriate technology and to 
develop the knowledge and training tools for both producers and consumers of energy. 
During the market creation stage, lessons from these individual pilot projects are expanded 
into programs. Grant / subsidy funds are directed towards funding the non-core aspects of 100
successful mini-grid operation such as knowledge platforms (for both consumers and 
providers), equipment standards certification, and providing technical assistance and 
technology transfer support. It may be likely that subsidization of minigrids will be required 
to ensure financial viability for the operators, especially if tariffs are regulated and set to 
compete with grid power. 
Evidence from previous systems suggest that longer-term maintenance and sustainability of 
systems is an issue. For this reason, it is also prudent to ensure that backstop operation and 
finance capability exists (supported by public monies) so that if a mini-grid operator cannot 
carry out their functions, alternatives can be put in place to prevent the loss of the asset 
and faith of the user base. The market creation stage is also when a tighter integration 
between the larger government and development banks and rural banks becomes useful to 
help with the issue of aggregation mentioned previously and to ensure financing is available 
for local mini-grid operators in a manner that is aligned with acceptable business practices 
(e.g. Islamic Finance).
During the market expansion stage, after the technical and financial viability and 
sustainability of mini-grid systems has been prove, the focus is on ensuring adequate finance 
for scale-up and demand for services. International experience suggests that this finance is 
best conducted by local banks, who are in turn able to access concessional finance provided 
by public monies. Finance for technology transfer and technical assistance will still be 
required, but directed towards assistance in managing a portfolio of projects rather than 
individual sites. 
As the market expands, private sector developers will wish to secure insurance to guard 
against expropriation of assets by the government, loss of demand should the grid be 
expanded to the area and political and security risks. As in the case of utility scale systems, 
existing risk mitigation mechanisms such as guarantees and insurance can be deployed to 
allay private sector concerns.
While the diagram and discussion below focus on financing mechanisms, these 
considerations are intrinsically linked to site and business model selection, discussed in 
greater detail in chapters 3 and 4. Viability depends also on a supportive and transparent 
regulatory environment and protection of the rights of producers and consumers.
#6.7.3 Financing framework applied to the Stand-Alone market segment
The challenges to private sector participation in the stand-alone market are similar to those 
faced in the mini-grid (e.g sustainability of rural service delivery) but are nuanced by the 
need for operations and maintenance over a wider group of consumers, the need for 
individual consumers to mobilize the up-front capital for such systems, user confidence in 
initial technical quality of systems, and ensuring that private sector participation is not 
‘crowded out’ by purely grant funded external systems that are deployed in the same service 
area of coverage. International experience suggests that a viable stand-alone ecosystem 
can be enhanced by a tight integration between technology providers, microfinance / 
commercial finance institutions, and government / multilateral development agencies.
During the market seeding stage, the focus is on developing standardized designs and 
business models that can be deployed commercially. Many of the uses of grant funding in 
the mini-grid market have applicability here; technology transfer, community engagement 
and demand assessment; feasibility studies; certification and measurements of benefits, 
and capacity building both for the suppliers and consumers of systems.
During the market creation stage, integration between government / international 
development partners, commercial banks and technology providers has proved useful in 
other regions. This requires public funds to fund an organization to certify equipment and 
vendors; extend concessional finance for microfinance / banking institutions that in turn 
perform due diligence and extend credit (compliant with Islamic Finance) towards the 
purchase of certified equipment to users, and, where required, subsidize systems such that 
they are affordable. Although stand-alone PV systems have been deployed in Afghanistan, 
evidence suggests that this lack of integration between technology and finance has 
prevented sustainable operation of many systems.
During the market expansion stage, the involvement of the local banks is expanded to 
extending credit to systems providers so that they can expand operations, while continuing 
credit facilities to consumers to purchase and maintain their systems. As in the case of 
mini-grids, this requires capacity building and concessional funding to commercial banks so 
they have the tools to perform commercial due diligence on these systems providers and 
extend credit in a manner compliant with Islamic Finance principles (where required). 
Public and grant funding also has a part to play in building awareness of the benefits and on 
proper use of the systems, and funding subsidies to ensure used equipment such as batteries 
are disposed of in an environmentally friendly manner. 
Risk mitigation mechanisms typically do not come into play in the stand alone market due 
to the lower capital investment and distributed assets. However, should sufficiently large 
private sector players be evidenced in the market who seek international commercial 
funding or insurance but require political risk / expropriation guarantees, risk mitigation 
mechanisms might be useful at that later stage of market development.
#6.8 Conclusion- from dependent to self-reliance 
The focus of the above discussed financing strategy is to incentivize private sector 
participation and investment. It is geared towards using government /donor monies to assist 
the transition from a purely donor grant-driven reality to a vibrant competitive sector 
dominated by private sector led growth. International experience suggests that as the 
market expands and greater penetration of RE development is apparent, the relative 
contribution of direct subsidies will decrease in place of risk mitigation mechanisms and 
concessional finance. Following figures summarize the overall financial framework and a 
possible financial landscape covering all stages of RE sector development towards selfreliance.
#7 IMPLEMENTATION OF ROADMAP 
The strategic rationale, methodology, project prioritization, technical considerations and 
financial strategies for achieving a step change in renewable energy deployment have been 
the focus of this work. The above is proposed to be achieved through the roadmapping
exercise by which a roadmap is created, implemented, monitored and updated as 
necessary47. The Renewable Energy Roadmap -RER2032- an output of this work, is a high 
level strategic plan that sets the pathways to achieve the intended objectives of RE sector 
development in Afghanistan. The RER2032 has set milestones, outlined tasks and prioritised 
actions. 
The next logical step is to implement the Roadmap by carrying out activities and initiatives 
that address Roadmap tasks and priorities and monitoring their progress with the help of a 
tracking system. Accordingly, the 4Ps - Proponents, Projects and People- are considered at 
the core of the Roadmap implementation plan. These are briefly discussed here. 
#7.1 Principles
The implementation of the Roadmap is based on four guiding principles: 
a) Empowered and dedicated institution(s) - to oversee the implementation of 
the Roadmap in a time bound and coordinated manner
b) Participatory and collaborative approach- among various ministries, 
departments, donors, public institutions, private sector and communities to 
work towards the common goals of achieving energy security and energy access 
by deploying renewable energy resources in Afghanistan
c) Optimisation of existing and raising new financial resources- through a mix 
of donor funds, national funds and private finances with a focus on privatesector led growth, and corresponding use of public monies to incentivize private 
sector participation.
d) State-of-the-art global practices and techniques- customised to the local 
conditions and adopted effectively across all departmental functions and 
projects
#7.2 Proponents
Proponents are a set of state-led institutions spanning across financing and implementation 
space that are needed to realize the intents of the Roadmap. It is critical that these 
institutions work in close collaboration with legislative and regulatory authorities to ensure 
that renewable energy development is within a transparent legal framework. At the project 
level these institutions shall work closely with private sector players, thereby effectively 
bridging the gap between policy and practice. Finally, these public institutions shall also be 
able to work with development partners, donors and civil society organisations and thus be 
able to grow independently in future. Following three institutions are relevant for the 
growth of RE sector in Afghanistan:
Setting up key institutions
Renewables energy project development organisation
• a for-profit public-private partnership organization 
focused on utility-scale generation;
• set up along the lines of AISA with overlapping 
functions to DABS;
• to catalyse and foster growth of RET (solar and wind) 
based power parks, and IPPs in collaboration with 
private sector;
• would act as a single-window clearance for future IPPs;
Rural electrification agency 
• Promote rural electrification projects, specifically 
mini-grids through site selection, land acquisition, 
access to finance, and regulatory approvals;
• set up along the lines of DABS, but would set up 
generation and distribution of electricity in rural areas 
only;
• shall support local enterprises as RESCO as distribution 
franchisees of DABS ;
• serve to minimize risk to private sector’s engagement 
in rural electrification;
• shall work in close collaboration with ministries and 
departments serving rural population and requiring 
energy services;
Financing institution for clean energy sector
• a dedicated and empowered institution to finance 
renewable energy and energy efficiency projects;
• facilitating a basket-fund approach;
• ensuring ring-fencing of funds for clean energy sector;
• shall provide debt and equity to project promoters and 
developers;
• can also extend financial support by way of conditional 
grants and last-stage equity that can provide viabilitygap financing;
• be able to raise funds through internal as well as 
external markets;
The above institutions are governed and guided by the government Ministries which 
are primarily policy and law-making authorities. There are good examples from the 
region that have served the purposes as described above. Some of these are 
Infrastructure Development Company Limited (IDCOL), Bangladesh; Indian Renewable 
Energy Development Agency (IREDA), India; Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI), 
India; and Alternate Energy Promotion Centre (AEPC), Nepal. 
#7.3 Projects 
To meet the targets of the RENP, it is imperative to find success on the ground with 
projects that are implemented in the ‘first stage’ of the Roadmap. The second focus 
area shall therefore be the development of strategically important and trendsetting 
projects in addition to priority sectors outlined in Roadmap.
1 Solar power park 
De-risking deployment of utility-scale wind and solar projects 
by Identifying suitable sites, providing infrastructure for 
evacuation and security, and streamlining regulatory 
clearance. SPPs may be set up by DABS as the SPPD, and 
eventually owned by private sector partners ;
2 Mini-grids with RESCO model
A cluster of mini-grid projects to be developed and bid out 
either individually or collectively following the RESCO 
business model;
4 Solar hot water systems for institutions
As an effective demand-side-management strategy to reduce 
electricity generation requirements, while offering potential 
for economic development through local manufacture, SHWS 
to be promoted in a programmatic mode;
5 Kabul roof-top solar 
Following the maturity and proven viability of this market 
globally, Kabul roof-top solar pilot project will seed this 
market for Afghanistan;
6 RE atlas 
A national-level initiative that could build upon the RE 
database and provide both a national strategic overview of RE 
deployment and link to project-level monitoring; thus,
providing insights on new development opportunities and 
overall RE roadmap progress.;
7 Pilot scale Geothermal
In line with the 55 MW Roadmap target, and recognizing the 
need for impetus in this sector, geothermal resource 
assessment linked where viable to pilot geothermal projects 
(either direct heat or electricity) to catalyze activity;
8 Pilot scale REEEP project
Although not directly identified in Roadmap, this pilot scale 
project to integrate RE with energy efficiency measures in 
the commercial and industrial sector shall improve the 
viability and acceptance of RETs;
9 Daikundi Mini-grid
Mini-grids being strategically important for Afghanistan, this 
project will help in standardizing mini-grid designs and 
business models;
10 Hisar-e-Shahi industrial park solar project
Strategically important project for industrial development 
that forms the backbone of Afghan economy;
#7.4 People 
The intent of the RE sector development in Afghanistan is its people who need energy 
for their well-being, livelihoods and development. The implementation of the 
Roadmap will also be shouldered by people who will perform technical, managerial, 
financial, administrative and other functions. The Roadmap therefore needs to be 
inclusive of people’s expectations and involvement for whom it will be implemented; 
while at the same time be owned by people who will implement it. 
Awareness and skilling are two important people centric attributes that the Roadmap 
will focus on for it implementation effectively. A national level initiative to raise the 
awareness levels of multi-stakeholders at multiple-levels will support the development 
of the RE sector, while short-term and long-term skill enhancement initiatives will 
make it impactful. Vocational training programs focusing on RE system design, 
installation and maintenance along with university level programmes targeting energy 
sector planners and managers will be required to both ensure sufficient local capacity 
exists to develop and maintain RE infrastructure while capitalizing on RE as an 
opportunity for employment generation.
As illustrated below, detailing of the implementation plan along with its 
monitoring and verification plan, are the next logical steps to move towards 
realizing the set objectives of the RE development in Afghanistan. The expected 
impacts, upon the successful implementation of the Roadmap are elaborated in 
the next and the final chapter.
#8 IMPACTS OF THE ROADMAP
The Roadmap facilitates the transformation of RE sector in Afghanistan from a ‘current 
project’ centric thinking and approach to a programmatic or an ecosystem approach that 
encompasses technologies, markets, institutions, finances and other enablers. These 
ecosystem elements synergise to achieve the objectives of the Roadmap which are energy 
security, energy access and socio-economic growth as listed in chapter 1 of this document. 
Moreover, the Roadmap has Broader Impacts that go beyond the said objectives.
#8.1 Employment generation and livelihood creation
Employment in the renewable energy sector has been growing rapidly at the global level. In 
2015, the number of direct and indirect employees in the sector increased by 5%, to 8.1
million supporting a total of 1095 GW. Many of these jobs are in the solar PV sector, and 
their share in the total is increasing every year. Accounting for large scale hydropower 
projects adds a further 1.3 million to the 8.1 million. 
According to Wei et al., upstream RE sector creates 10 jobs per MW related to 
construction, operation and maintenance of projects; with solar creating nearly 15 
jobs/MW, and wind/hydro producing 6 job/MW capacity. Thus, the addition of 5000 MW RE 
capacity is likely to support 50,000 jobs in Afghanistan.
Further, RE projects will also create livelihood opportunities in the downstream sector. 
About 70% of Afghan population is not served by the grid. The bulk of the population resides 
in rural areas. The deployment of RE mini-grids and other stand-alone projects in rural areas 
with unmet demands for electricity and thermal energy can significantly improve the rural 
economy, contributing to sustainable livelihoods through affordable agriculture, farm based 
and off-farm enterprises. These would in turn imply more employment, induced by the 
setting up of the electricity infrastructure. For instance, a rural mini-grid of 1 MW could 
positively impact around 1,000 households and create or sustain 50 – 60 livelihoods, 
including direct jobs generated (such as new opportunities as maintenance engineers for 
the electricity setup). This does not include indirect benefits accrued from better access, 
such as better healthcare and education facilities, which shall attract new jobs as well.
Thus, there are far-reaching and tangible induced impacts that can be derived through 
provision of reliable and competitively priced energy services. 
#8.2 Infrastructure development and enterprise development 
Apart from benefits related to livelihood creation and employment, RE projects provide a 
boost to local economy by setting up new infrastructure and strengthening the existing ones. 
Specifically, solar and wind power parks and other utility scale projects necessitate building 
of roads and facilitate setting up of water supply and other facilities. Enhanced energy 
access through RE projects facilitates movement of industries to the otherwise virgin 
locations as well as in the creation of new cottage industries, that are well served by 
electricity.
Improved energy infrastructure would also have a positive effect on larger industries in 
terms of their competitiveness and their exports. Afghanistan Chambers of Commerce in 
their Business Monitor indicated energy shortage as the major bottleneck (88%) in the 
development of industries. Industrial parks such as the ones in Hisar-e-Shahi would also 
benefit greatly from reliable electricity supply, as having such a source would help them 
lower their overhead costs and hence create goods at a lower price. Finally, energy access 
would catalyse setting up Rural Economic Zones – or rural business hubs including a market 
for agri produce and inputs, repair and maintenance services and farm based enterprises 
such as processing plants and units.
On the social side, creation and operation of hospitals and schools are strongly dependent 
upon provision of electricity and thermal energy. Not surprisingly, best facilities for health 
and education in Afghanistan are to be found in the cities. Improvements in the energy 
supply would help the urban as well as rural hospitals, schools and other community 
institutions invest in state-of-the-art equipment, and hence improve their overall services.
In terms of local economies, some of the impacts are as follows:
• Agriculture: Though the most important employment sector is agriculture and 
livestock where 39% Afghan population is employed, the productivity in the agriculture 
sector is low, with agriculture contributing just over 25% of GDP. Improved electricity 
access would impact the farming structure, cropping patterns and behaviour, due to 
better irrigation. This would lead to better farm incomes, and better agricultural 
services;
• Financial services, especially microfinances, could be developed more easily. They 
would be both a giver and a recipient of the benefits provided by energy access. Over 
time, this could also stretch to core banking services such as local co-operatives;
• Labour markets: The employment by sector and gender would also improve with 
expansion in the farming and services sectors.;
#8.3 Local manufacturing and supply chain creation
Setting up RE projects would require local manufacturing of auxiliary as well as main 
components and equipment in Afghanistan. Focusing on local manufacturing would help 
improve the upstream and downstream supply chains develop in capacities and capabilities 
as well. The elements of local manufacturing and supply chain would not only limit to 
fabrication, assembly and system integration, but would also extend to transportation, 
warehousing, engineering, procurement and construction activities. RE supply chain, once 
created, will benefit other sectors as well. 
#8.4 Co-ordinated planning and budgeting across various government 
departments
One of the re-requisites for implementing the Roadmap, is to inculcate a practice of 
coordinated planning and budgeting of resources across various departments within the MEW 
and also with other Ministries. The mechanism of ‘basket fund’ would trigger this practice 
which will have far-reaching impacts in terms of optimum utilisation and effective 
deployment of resources, for efficient gains to the overall economy of Afghanistan. 
#8.5 Co-benefits of climate change mitigation and resilience/ adaptation
Afghanistan is a high-risk profile country according to the National Risk and Vulnerability 
Assessment (NRVA 2012). The Global Adaptation Index 2012, ranks it as the most vulnerable 
in country in the world, taking into account the country’s exposure, sensitivity and ability 
to cope with climate related hazards, worsened by the socio-political conflicts and security. 
Coping with the impacts of climate change is a major challenge for development in 
Afghanistan given that its negative effects are likely to be most severely felt by the poor 
and marginalized due to their high dependence on subsistence agriculture and limited 
capacity to cope with the impacts of climate variability and extremes. 
The access to reliable and cost-effective energy will strengthen community-level coping
strategies and improve income, thereby increasing their resilience to climate change 
impacts i.e. adaptation related benefits. Besides, the deployment of RE as per the Roadmap, 
will reduce the dependence of communities on conventional fuels such as kerosene, diesel 
and biomass, contributing to mitigation elated benefits as well. 
#8.6 Sustainable development through leap-frogging
Afghanistan currently has one of the lowest per-capita carbon emissions in the world. 
However, in order to develop itself into a successful economy, its energy use would have to 
increase greatly. This will in-turn increase its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. By 
developing its RE potential, Afghanistan is in a unique position where it can leapfrog over 
carbon intensive energy sources like coal and oil, while at the same time following 
sustainable development pathways. 
#8.7 Cross-border trade and energy security
Afghanistan gets more than 60% of its power requirements via imports. It also faces issues 
from grid snaps in its neighbouring countries, causing blackouts in cities like Kabul. As per
the Roadmap, Afghanistan’s power generation capacity from domestic RE resources would 
reach 850 MW by the end of Stage 1, which would potentially replace around 40% of imports
at the current levels, avoiding drain of foreign exchange that is required to finance energy 
imports. Focussing on renewables for domestic power generation, would ensure power 
generation and grid stability for its current and future energy needs, and would thus help 
Afghanistan achieve energy security. 
The decreasing prices of renewables and their increased generation could be an opportunity 
for Afghanistan to be a net energy supplier in the long term. In the short term, it could also 
act as a conduit transporting energy from Central Asian and West Asian economies 
(Tajikistan and Turkmenistan) to the energy starved South Asian countries 
(India/Pakistan/Nepal), while using its own generated energy within the country. 
#8.8 Knowledge creation and sharing through regional platforms
Roadmap has introduced knowledge tools for developing projects, customising business 
models, benchmarking for RE costs, stage-gate framework for sector development etc. 
These knowledge tools, geared towards planning for RE sector will be useful for other 
countries in the region and Afghanistan can use regional platforms such as ECO and SAARC 
to share this knowledge. Besides, the valuable experience to be generated through 
implementing different types of RE projects for various applications would create a body of 
knowledge that can also be shared with other countries in the region. 
#8.9 Potential to explore climate and sustainable development funds 
The development of RE sector as envisaged in the Roadmap, will be aligned to the global 
agenda of climate change and sustainable development. Afghanistan will thus be able to 
explore global resources and funds that are available for these sectors i.e. Green Climate 
Funds (GCF), Global Environment Facility (GEF), Scaling up Renewable Energy Programme 
(SREP) among others. Some of these funds are already made available to Afghanistan. 
However, their portfolio can be expanded to support the RE and related sectors. 
#8.10 Membership of IRENA, ISA and other organisations
Renewable Energy Roadmap is a strong endorsement of the GoIRA for supporting this sector. 
The introduction/ presence of an enabling ecosystem will further showcase the commitment 
at all levels to promote this sector. These actions will facilitate Afghanistan to become 
member of international organisation such as International Renewable Energy Agency 
(IRENA) and International Solar Alliance (ISA). These memberships will further support the 
development of RE sector through tangible well as non-tangible instruments such as 
demonstration projects, feasibilities studies, mapping of resources, monitoring and 
evaluation studies, knowledge exchange etc. 
#8.11 Advancement of SE4All and SDGs agenda
Afghanistan, despite its internal challenges related to poverty, security etc., will adopt the 
global agenda towards sustainable energy for all and sustainable development goals through 
the implementation of the Roadmap. This will catalyse a progressive thinking and approach 
to development, impacting not only the internal well-being but also propagating an 
enterprising image of Afghans. 