File Name: AFG-NREP-2013-EN
Year: 2013
Country Name: Afghanistan
Country Code: AFG
Category: NREP
Document Title: Afghanistan Rural Renewable Energy Policy
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: April, 2013
Start Year: 2017
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF AFGHANISTAN 
MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND WATER (MEW) 
MINISTRY OF RURAL REHABILITATION AND DEVELOPMENT (MRRD) 
Afghanistan Rural Renewable Energy 
Policy 
Final Draft 
April, 2013
# Abbreviations
ANDS Afghanistan National Development Strategy;
ANSA Afghanistan National Standard Authority ; 
GDP Gross Domestic Product ;
ICE Inter-Ministerial Commission for Energy ;
kV Kilovolt ;
KWh Kilowatt-hour ;
MEW Ministry of Energy and Water ;
MRRD Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development ;
MW Megawatt ;
NEPA National Environmental Protection Agency ;
NGO(s) Non-governmental organization(s) ;
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory ;
NSP National Solidarity Program ;
O&M Operations and Maintenance ;
RECC Rural Energy Coordination Committee ;
REED Rural Energy and Enterprise Directorate ;
RED Renewable Energy Department ;
RREP Rural Renewable Energy Policy
#Definitions 
Biogas: a combustible gas created by anaerobic decomposition of organic material primarily 
through cattle excreta, composed primarily of methane, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen 
sulphide. ;
Biomass: energy obtained from renewable organic matter such as agricultural crops and 
residue, wood and wood waste, animal waste, aquatic plants and organic components of 
municipal and industrial wastes. ;
Independent power producers: producers of electricity who sell their power to electricity 
distributors for supplying to the national grid. ;
Renewable energy: energy obtained from renewable natural sources, such as the energy from 
the sun, wind, biomass, water and geothermal resources. Unlike, fossil fuels these 
sources of energy are abundant. ;
Renewable energy technology: technology that converts a primary renewable source of 
energy or energy resource to the desired form of energy supply
#1 Introduction 
Afghanistan’s consumption of electricity is one of the lowest in the world. In November 2012, 
the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) estimated that 28% of the household was connected 
to the power supply systems, the vast majority of whom live in urban centres. Rural power 
supplies continue to rely on hydropower, with limited diesel and battery options, and are 
estimated to cover less than 9% of the rural population. This lack of access is significant in light 
of the fact that more than 75% of Afghans live in rural areas and 67 per cent of the national 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) comes from rural areas. 
The implication is that the potential for development and growth in the rural sector, given 
appropriate investment, is significant, with access to energy as a contributory element. The 
2012 Asia Foundation Survey of the Afghan People found that 14 per cent of respondents 
identified lack of electricity as a major problem in their local area. 
Thus, the Afghan Government needs to initiate a sustained, long-term expansion of rural energy, 
as identified in the Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS), which emphasizes that 
the overall policy focus for rural areas should be the expansion of rural energy and electricity 
services. 
Afghanistan intends to pursue this objective by harnessing power from renewable resources – 
an indigenous, clean, and abundant resource whose considerable potential the country has yet 
to exploit. It needs to do so with the full participation and collaboration of government agencies, 
the international donor community, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the private sector 
and, not least, the beneficiary communities themselves. 
This policy is limited for the promotion of renewable energy technologies through utilization of 
available local resources in the rural area and off-grid locations. The policy will serve to provide 
enabling environment for various stakeholders, donors and encourage private sector 
investment for the development of rural energy technology in systematic and organized 
manner. This policy will be a component of National Energy Policy of Afghanistan to be 
developed by MEW. 
#1.1 Rationale 
While Afghanistan is a late starter in providing access to clean energy to its rural population, it 
embarks on the journey with considerable advantages. First, there is now a prodigious body of 
experience to guide policymakers in identifying and emulating successes and avoiding the 
numerous failures of the past. While the country presents unique opportunities and challenges, 
there is relevant experience in similar terrains, political, environmental and social contexts to 
enable the creation of a suite of policy measures more likely to lead to successful outcomes. 
Renewable energy is expected to provide increased energy security, energy independence, 
diversity of supplies, and impetus to local industries, job creation, social cohesion, rural 
development and environmental benefits. 
#2 Policy Objectives 
The strategic objective of the Renewable Rural Energy Policy (RREP) is to create better social, 
economic and environmental conditions for the citizens of Afghanistan in rural locations. 
Its immediate objectives are to provide an appropriate policy oversight and management 
mechanism able to ensure that a sufficient level of efficient clean energy is made available to all 
rural consumers. In doing so, the RREP will aim to achieve the following: 
• To service the energy requirements of livelihood activities that facilitates diversification 
of rural employment opportunities and an improvement in rural incomes. It is 
recognised that the deployment of renewable energy can supplement national energy 
supply options to expedite economic empowerment, improve productivity, and enhance 
income generation. ;
• To provide electric lighting for rural households, displacing hydrocarbon and solid fuel 
lighting, and enabling use of basic household appliances and labour saving devices.; 
• To displace the use of solid fuels for cooking and heating to the maximum extent 
possible. ;
• To promote social equity by providing access to renewable energy supplies that 
improves human development indicators and alleviates poverty amongst deprived 
sections of society. Rural electrification can thus facilitate social service delivery and 
help improve the well-being of those living below the National Poverty Line without 
access to renewable energy supplies. ;
• To alleviate the environmental and health impacts of electricity generated by 
unsustainable and inefficient traditional biomass fuels and fossil fuels. Displacing 
greenhouse gas emissions will provide significant global climate change benefits. ;
• To encourage energy efficiency in parallel with the other objectives, to minimize longterm generation needs.;
#2.1 Guiding Principles 
The specific principles of the RREP are: 
• Renewable energy options will be pursued based upon renewable energy resource 
availability, distance from the national grid, community ability to operate and maintain 
the particular renewable energy supplied, equipment cost, and the number of 
beneficiary households. • Where appropriate, the generation of productive power will be a preferred option over 
stand-alone systems since the productivity, income and welfare benefits derived will 
enhance future ability to pay for supplies received. ;
• The impact of renewable energy in rural areas will be optimized wherever possible by 
integrating energy solutions with the provision of social infrastructure, such as 
educational and medical facilities, clean water supply, irrigation and agriculture, roads 
and telecommunications, so as to promote greater social welfare, productivity, trade, 
and economic well-being amongst beneficiary communities. ;
• Since mini-grid costs depend significantly on local conditions, a range of information 
will need to be gathered regarding village topologies, load profiles, and time series data 
on wind speeds and water flow. ;
• To facilitate private sector participation as rural energy service providers, rural service 
delivery mechanisms may involve energy service companies, equipment dealers or 
cooperatives. ;
• To overcome the high initial system cost relative to conventional alternatives, and to 
provide a means whereby households can continue to pay amounts equivalent to their 
conventional energy purchases. Long-term consumer credit through a microfinance 
organization may be one mechanism to address initial costs. ;
• To support rural entrepreneurs with a range of services, including training, marketing, 
feasibility studies, business planning, management, financing and linkages to 
community organizations as a means to expand access to renewable energy services. 
Measures will be devised to support the private sector in mobilizing financing and 
enabling public sector investment in promotional, demonstrative, and pilot projects. ;
• To operate energy systems as sustainable business units, including cost recovery 
through revenue collection, and for Operations and Maintenance (O&M), all community 
members will be expected to contribute cash or labour towards the construction of the 
renewable energy systems and pay against a pre-determined monthly tariff as agreed 
format. In response to rural poverty, some level of investment subsidy from the 
government may be necessary to achieve affordability and meet the Government’s rural 
electrification objectives. ;
• In mobilising rural communities and providing management training to operate and 
maintain household or community facilities, special emphasis will be given to involving 
women in management of household systems. ;
• Rural energy installations will demand the availability of professional technical service 
and support within a reasonable distance, preferably not beyond the immediate district. 
• Clustering of installations, where appropriate, will be encouraged to support 
development of support facilities, to produce marketable carbon credits to offset 
investment costs, and to improve sustainability. ;
• In applying the RREP, establishing a domestic technology manufacturing base is seen as 
one avenue to lower costs, improve service quality, create employment, and enhance 
technical skills. • To provide support for the development and management of new technologies, and to 
increase efficiency of use of traditional energy resources, emphasis will be placed on 
research and development in rural energy technologies. ;
• To achieve widespread dissemination of renewable energy systems, capacity at all levels 
will need to be developed. ;
#2.2 Legal and Regulatory Framework objectives 
An enabling environment requires the introduction of certain regulatory measures from the 
Government to attract private sector and promote sustainability. These regulatory measures 
will include: 
• Developing an appropriate legal framework for pricing and tariff structures, working 
with rural communities to support the integration of renewable energy into the 
economy and attract private sector investment. ;
• To synchronise power generated from rural energy systems with the national grid, 
establishing procedures and charges for transporting power from the point of 
generation to the customer through the national electricity grid using existing 
infrastructure. ;
• Power purchase agreements between independent power producers, energy providers 
and beneficiary communities. ;
• Development of a Grid Code for connecting existing micro hydropower plants to 
national and/or regional grids.;
The legal and regulatory frameworks will be developed in collaboration with existing 
frameworks for the overall development of energy sector, mainly coordinated through MEW 
and Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat. 
#2.3 Standards
As a subset of regulation, safety and quality standards and codes of practice for generation, 
transmission and distribution will be developed by Afghanistan National Standards Authority 
(ANSA) in coordination by MRRD and MEW, including through consultation among 
stakeholders. In addition, a certification, testing and enforcement unit for renewable energy will 
be established to ensure the acceptable quality of renewable energy technologies. Service 
providers will be categorized according to their products and services against agreed standards 
and will be required to meet minimum standards to be eligible in the supply of equipment or 
services. 
The application and enforcement of standards, including those associated with institutional 
capacity, and the establishment of domestic certification, will contribute to financial and 
operational sustainability.
#3 Barriers to Renewable Rural Energy Policy Implementation
The significant barriers to the implementation of renewable energy that need to be addressed 
include: 
• Poor institutional framework and infrastructure at the sub-national level for rural 
energy promotion ;
• Quality of equipment and services related to the renewable energy system installations. ;
• Poor baseline data availability; and lack of information on local renewable energy 
resources. ;
• The capital cost of renewable energy technology is expensive compared to conventional 
energy fuels. ;
• Lack of consumer awareness on the benefits and opportunities of renewable energy. ;
• Financial, legal, regulatory and institutional barriers need to be overcome in order to 
implement renewable energy technology and develop markets.; 
• A focus on the consumption of energy in rural areas, rather than productive uses to 
address limited economic opportunities there. ;
• A low level of capacity at all levels of Government, private sector and non-governmental 
organizations for the promotion of renewable energy in Afghanistan. In particular: ;
o In villages there is a lack of trained human personnel for O&M ;
o At the district and provincial levels there is a shortage of personnel trained in 
providing technical support ;
o At the central and provincial level there is lack of capacity in planning and 
project management ;
o Private sector manufacturing of micro-hydro equipment needs to increase the 
quality of its products and service reliability. ;
• Lack of security in areas of the country. ;
#4 Renewable Energy Resources 
A brief summary of the Potential and Status of Renewable Energy in Afghanistan is given below,
which also describes the current status of its development. 
#5 Scope of Policy 
For the purpose of this Policy, renewable energy includes the following: 
1. hydropower plants 
2. wind energy 
3. geothermal 
4. solar energy, and 
5. biomass. 
This Policy is limited to renewable energy and rural electrification through renewable energy 
off-grid systems to supply energy needs for rural population in Afghanistan. 
#5.1 General approach for renewable energy applications in rural areas
o Arrangements will be made to provide technical assistance to provincial governments 
for the identification, planning and implementation of renewable energy projects in 
rural areas. ;
o Guidelines and manuals related to renewable energy systems will be developed. ;
o Renewable energy projects will be connected to the grid where the grid is accessible. o The private sector will be encouraged to work as service providers to manufacture 
equipment, and supply installation services and spare parts and also encouraged to 
work as energy service providers, and developers for rural renewable energy systems. ;
o Renewable energy projects, wherever feasible, will be integrated alongside irrigation, 
education, health, drinking water, and small-scale industry initiatives. ;
o Some of the wind and solar projects may require hybrid solutions to provide continuous 
energy supply. ;
o Work will be initiated to prepare a renewable energy master plan through MEW and 
MRRD to identify potential and opportunities for rural areas. . ;
o A testing centre shall be established under this Policy to test and certify renewable 
energy equipment and related accessories. ;
o Public awareness activities will be conducted to the benefits and opportunities of 
renewable energy. ;
#5.1.1 Mini/Micro-Hydropower Plants 
Subsidies will be provided for the implementation of mini/micro-hydro plants up to 1 MW 
capacity through an appropriate delivery mechanism. Communities will be encouraged to 
provide a contribution in terms of cash and/or labour for implementation. Coordination with 
financial institutions will be undertaken to provide loans for such installations. Appropriate 
operation, maintenance and management systems would be enforced for the sustainability of 
the micro hydro plants. 
#5.1.2 Wind Energy 
Wind data will be collected and analysed to establish the potential of wind energy systems, 
mainly for electricity generation and water pumping. Potential sites for exploiting wind energy 
coupled to livelihood opportunities will be identified. 
#5.1.3 Solar Energy 
Solar powered applications through solar photovoltaic and solar thermal for lighting, irrigation, 
community water supplies, water and space heating, and fruit and vegetable drying, will be 
promoted. Appropriate subsidy models and delivery mechanisms will be prepared to promote 
solar energy in rural areas. 
#5.1.4 Biomass 
o Biogas will be promoted to replace the use of fuel wood and animal wastes as sources of 
energy for cooking. ;
o Emphasis will be given to research to increase efficiency, and to reduce the cost of 
household biogas production technology, including development and dissemination of 
community and institutional biogas plants. ;
o The establishment of biogas-related information centres will be encouraged in 
coordination with local institutions. o Technology for the production of biomass gasification will be developed and 
disseminated through technology transfer. ;
o Consumption of biomass will be reduced and efficiency of fuelwood stoves enhanced by 
expanding the use and local production of fuel-efficient stoves. ;
#5.1.5 Geothermal 
o Efforts will be undertaken to demonstrate the potential of geothermal energy as a pilot 
project in feasible area. ;
o A database of geothermal sites will be developed. ;
#6 Policy Implementation 
Rural electrification through renewable energy sources will be implemented in a phased, 
gradual approach to be set out in a Policy implementation road map. 
6.1 Short Term 
The Policy for the short term (up to the end of 2016) shall be as follows: 
Public Sector: A portfolio of projects that will benefit rural populations (upto 100 kW) will be 
identified in rural areas that are not likely to be profitable for the private sector. These projects 
will essentially comprise remote sites or represent areas characterized by uneconomic levels of 
power demand. These projects will be undertaken through public sector financing and/or 
through donor community participation. Project selection and criteria will be developed by the 
Rural Energy Unit of MRRD’s Rural Energy and Enterprise Directorate and MEW’s Renewable 
Energy Department. Community capacity will be enhanced to take the responsibility for 
sustainable O&M of these systems with backstopping support provided through, among others, 
MRRD-based programmes. 
Private Sector: The private sector will be encouraged to undertake commercially viable 
generation projects using renewable energy. Such projects and associated distribution grids not 
connected to national or regional utility grids may be developed by private entities, public 
agencies, NGOs, community organizations, or individuals at any suitable location. The 
Government will develop regulatory frameworks for independent power producers, including 
power purchase agreements and a standardized framework for tariffs. 
Strengthening private entrepreneurship will be an important strategy to fulfil rural energy 
needs. Strategic approaches will include supporting rural entrepreneurs with training, 
marketing, feasibility studies, business planning, and management and financing modalities 
Short term emphasis will also be on the design, demonstration, and testing of off-grid, 
community, and stand-alone renewable energy systems, including financing and marketing 
modalities. Extensive widespread funding and deployment will be targeted, based on initial 
studies and field evaluation, for the medium term (2017−2021), with financing arrangements to 
be in place by the outset of that period.
#6.1.1 Village mini-grids 
Village mini-grids are able to serve tens or hundreds of households in settings where sufficient 
geographical density allows economical interconnections to a central power generator such as a 
small hydro, and contributing to an increase in rural industry and employment. The 
Government will facilitate the provision of credit, certificate or licensing procedures for private 
sector, power tariffs, and capital cost subsidies for projects that support the development of 
rural energy systems. Donors will be requested to assist with technical assistance for 
technology development and manufacturing within Afghanistan. 
#6.1.2 Business Models 
Sustainable and replicable business models for both consumptive and productive uses of 
renewable energy in rural areas will be developed. In addition to existing solar home system 
business models, other models that promote long-term economic and social benefits will be 
adopted by building mini-grids around income-generating micro-enterprises incorporating 
renewable energy into water, agriculture, education and telecommunications. In all projects, the 
ability to demonstrate a viable business model, whether public or private, will be key to 
achieving project sustainability and replication. 
Effective policy approaches for reaching the poorest may combine private sector involvement 
with targeted public subsidies linked to development objectives and strategies for increasing 
incomes. Long-term consumer credit to overcome high initial costs will be provided through 
dealer-facilitated credit and/or credit through, for example, microfinance organizations. 
Private entrepreneurs in rural areas will be trained and financial assistance provided to 
establish Rural Energy Service Centres that will provide technical services related to the O&M of 
renewable energy systems at the local level. 
#6.1.3 Financing 
In consideration of the high capital costs for many rural electrification options and the low cash 
capacity of rural households, innovative small-scale, affordable financing mechanisms will need 
to be developed, which may include micro-credit, leasing, prepaid meters and fees for service 
provision. The Government will investigate the potential for micro-credit financing of 
renewable energy projects. 
#6.1.4 Financial Incentives 
The following financial incentives will apply to renewable energy power projects, and equally 
applicable to private, public-private, and public sector renewable energy power projects: 
o No customs duty or sales tax shall be imposed for machinery equipment and spare parts 
meant for the initial installation or for balancing, modernization, maintenance, 
replacement, or expansion after commissioning of projects for power generation 
utilizing renewable energy resources. ;
o For the first 5 years of its commercial operation, the renewable energy developer shall 
be exempt from income tax arising from the profits derived from that operation. ;
o The Government may provide subsidies to communities to target the poorest segments 
of the population in rural areas.;
#6.1.5 Energy Efficiency 
The introduction of energy efficiency, coupled with renewable energy technology in rural areas, 
will help rural consumers by reducing supply constraint and lowering their own energy 
expenditure. Energy efficiency measures in off-grid and grid-connected systems will reduce 
costs through lower generation investment costs and reduced energy usage, and will also abate 
pollution and displace the importation of fossil fuels. 
#6.2 Medium Term 
Projects achieving financial closure during period 2017 through 2021. 
Utilizing international and short-term domestic renewable energy policy experience, a more 
comprehensive medium term policy framework will be prepared for the systematic 
implementation of renewable energy technology and scaling up of capacity deployment. 
#6.3 Long Term
Projects achieving financial closure during period 2022 through 2027. 
Renewable energy will be fully mainstreamed and integrated within the nation’s energy 
planning process. Renewable energy use at rural and urban household level will become 
widespread, served by an established local manufacturing and service base. It will become 
mandatory for the power distribution facility to buy all the electricity offered to them from 
renewable energy projects. 
#7 Institutional Framework 
The institutional stakeholders in renewable energy in Afghanistan include the following.
#7.1 Inter-Ministerial Commission for Energy (ICE) / Rural Energy Coordination Committee 
ICE, headed by the Ministry of Economy, previously exercised oversight of energy sector policy 
and infrastructure investments and coordinates support from development partners. ICE 
brought together a range of Government and donor interests to assure coordinated action and 
practical planning. It was not responsible for project implementation but developed policy in 
line with fiscal and policy priorities and international standards. The ICE Sub-committee on 
Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification brought together Government agencies, donors and 
non-governmental actors involved in the sector. 
Although the ICE closed during 2012, it is proposed that its ICE Sub-committee on Renewable 
Energy and Rural Electrification functions will be undertaken by the Rural Energy Co-ordination 
Committee (RECC), established in late 2012 as a joint initiative of MEW and MRRD, together 
with international partners, jointly chaired by the Deputy Ministers of MEW and MRRD.
#7.2 Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) 
MEW has overall responsibility for electrification, mainly to provide energy needs to the bulk of 
the population. MEW is the Government’s institution for all issues relating to electricity 
generation, transmission and distribution, pricing, regulation, and consumption. It also serves to 
coordinate and plan the nation’s power sector, formulate policy and liaise with provincial 
governments on related issues. MEW’s historic emphasis has been on the rehabilitation of the 
national grid to improve urban power, based on the 2004 Energy Master Plan. Currently, MEW 
is engaged in development of 20 year Power sector master plan for integrated energy supply 
and development and is supported by Asian Development Bank (ADB). MEW launched National 
Energy Supply Program (NESP) as a National Proirity Program (NPP) under infrastructure 
development cluster to develop larger sized generation and expansion of transmission and 
distribution networks. The Renewable Energy Department of MEW is engaged in coordination 
of promotion of renewable energy technologies, and Energy Policy Department of the ministry 
is engaged with other stakeholders to develop enabling policy and strategy for overall energy 
sector of the country. 
#7.3 Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) 
MRRD has general oversight of delivery of all non-farm programmes in rural Afghanistan. Part 
of its responsibility includes supporting energy infrastructure in rural areas. Through its 
provincial offices, MRRD has a point of liaison with provincial governments. It manages the 
National Solidarity Program (NSP), through which traditional local jirga and shuras are formed 
into local Community Development Councils, and are trained and empowered to undertake local 
development. MRRD has been the principal arm of the Government in promoting rural 
electrification through its programs: NSP has supported energy access to rural areas through 
the installation of micro-hydropower plants, solar home systems and diesel generators. MRRD 
launched Energy for Rural Development in Afghanistan (ERDA) under the National Area-Based 
Development Programme (NABDP) in 2008 to address sustainability issues related to rural 
energy projects. ERDA is currently a stand-alone component of the Agriculture and Rural 
Development Cluster National Priority Program, ‘National Water and Natural Resources 
Development’. 
As a policy oversight and management mechanism, MRRD’s Rural Energy and Enterprise 
Directorate, reporting to the Office of the Minister, will promote and facilitate the exploitation of 
renewable energy resources in rural areas. To do so, separate institutional, reporting and 
operational guidelines will be developed following promulgation of the Policy, including a Policy 
Oversight Committee with joint representation from MEW and MRRD, among others. The 
Directorate will be tasked with: 
o Implementing Government policies and plans on rural energy, ;
o Preparing subsidy policy and its delivery mechanisms for various rural energy systems; 
o Developing projects, serving as a `single window’ facility for processing renewable 
energy projects for rural applications. ;
o Promoting local manufacturing ;
o Creating awareness and facilitating technology transfer o Channelling international assistance on rural energy development ;
o Providing support to communities to develop their capacity to implement rural energy 
programs ;
o Coordinating all associated activities as the national facilitating mechanism for the 
development of rural renewable energy in the country. ;
#7.4 Provincial Governments 
Provincial governments have in the past been involved in rural electrification projects with 
assistance from Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs), and have a vested interest in 
encouraging development of renewable energy, which in many cases offer a least cost and 
sometimes only option for access to clean commercial energy. Provincial Development Plans in 
many cases include renewable rural energy projects that meet the local demand. Relevant 
government and sub-governance institutions at the provincial level would be capacitated for 
identification, planning, implementation, and monitoring of rural renewable energy systems. 
#8 Stakeholders 
This Policy acknowledges as stakeholders the Government, private sector, community 
organizations and NGOs engaged in supporting renewable energy services. 
The role of Government is to provide a policy and regulatory framework that encourages and 
facilitates participation of the private sector and civil society in rural electrification. Ultimate 
responsibility for rural renewable energy and rural electrification promotion and develop 
conducive environment for renewable energy will reside in the MRRD Rural Energy and 
Enterprise Directorate (up to 100 kW) and overall renewable energy promotion mainly for 
commercial and urban application and coordination is the responsibility of Renewable Energy 
Department (RED) of MEW. In case, MRRD is implementing projects above 100 kW capacity, it 
will be coordinated with MEW and the MEW when implementing projects below 100 kW in the 
rural area will be coordinated with MRRD. The Government will be asked to allocate sufficient 
resources to MRRD and MEW to enable it to meet its stated objectives.
REED will clarify current relevant practices in renewable energy development for rural area, set 
out standards and codes of practice for adoption, and establish implementation procedures and 
guidelines to attract and facilitate donor assistance and private investment in renewable energy 
and rural electrification. It will coordinate and maintain oversight of the activities of all other 
stakeholders in the rural energy sector, and ensure that these activities respect the Policy and 
procedures. 
REED will liaise with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economy, MEW, the National 
Environment Protection Agency (NEPA), the Afghanistan National Standards Authority (ANSA) 
and other relevant Government institutions on standardization, maximizing the socio-economic 
impact of rural electrification while minimizing environmental hazards. To do so, it proposes to 
establish a Policy Oversight Committee as a formal collaborative oversight and management 
mechanism, with membership drawn from MRRD, MEW and appropriate Government and 
international partners. At technical level, REED and RED will convene a Technical Working Group to include 
representatives from MEW, NEPA, ANSA, MRRD, the Ministry of Mines, the Ministry of Public 
Health, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock, donors, 
sector NGOs and any other pertinent body, to coordinate renewable energy development and 
delivery of renewable energy services to key economic and social sectors. 
REED will maintain close liaison with NEPA in working towards accession to the Kyoto Protocol, 
and to develop and coordinate Clean Development Mechanism projects designed to qualify for 
carbon credits to reduce the cost of investment in renewable energy rural electrification. 
REED and RED will develop a database for the assessment and implementation of rural 
renewable energy projects, and disseminate this information to all decision-making bodies on 
all levels. The renewable energy database will include at the minimum, site selection criteria 
and evaluation, power needs assessments, funding options for projects, available programmes 
and programme information, and affordable and adapted energy solutions. 
The private sector will be encouraged to participate and invest in rural electrification and in the 
deployment of energy efficient renewable energy technologies under this Policy and in accord 
with the regulatory framework established by the Government. 
The international and bilateral donor community will be encouraged to assist for developing a 
Strategy for policy implementation and provide financial assistance to Government of 
Afghanistan to develop renewable energy systems. 
NGOs will be encouraged to participate in rural electrification through community mobilization 
and enhancing community social capital. Representatives will be invited to participate in 
Technical Working Group activities. 
In the interest of coordination, all participants will coordinate activities in renewable energy 
and rural electrification with REED of MRRD and RED of MEW. They will maintain records of all 
renewable energy rural electrification projects with mapping of the stakeholders working in the 
sector. 
#9 Monitoring and Evaluation 
Monitoring and evaluation of this Policy and its implementation will be conducted by MEW and 
MRRD through policy oversight committee as follows:
o Monitoring and evaluation activity will be strengthened at all levels of rural energy 
development programs by establishing geographic and management information 
systems ;
o Rural energy programmes will be monitored and evaluated based on output indicators ;
o An energy auditing system will be developed and implemented. ;
#10 The Way Forward 
A strategy for implementation of the RREP will be developed which will translate the objectives 
and deliverables of the Policy into a practical implementation planIt will be desirablein constructing the implementation strategy, to clarify and coordinate the roles and 
responsibilities of the various agencies concerned in order to build a coherent, inclusive and 
stable framework for success. 
The purpose of the RREP is to create the conditions for the development of renewable 
technology for rural communities to meet their energy demand. The Government will adopt a 
phased, managed and partnership approach to renewable energy projects that are well 
conceived and show the potential to providing acceptable social, environmental and financial 
returns for all investors and stakeholders. This will lessen the strain on fiscal resources and 
hold greater potential for successful implementation. 
An appropriate enabling environment towards full commercial operation will nurture the 
technologies that are proven to meet these Policy objectives. Progress towards meeting the 
targets, objectives and deliverables of the RREP will be evaluated at the end of short term 
project implementation, to see if these are being achieved and to determine whether the policy 
direction remains appropriate. The RREP may be revised as required, based on the results from 
monitoring and evaluation activities.
