File Name: AFG-CPD-2014-EN
Year: 2014
Country Name: Afghanistan
Country Code: AFG
Category: CPD
Document Title: Country programme document for Afghanistan (2015 2019)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2-5 September 2014
Start Year: 2015
End Year: 2019
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

Executive Board of the
United Nations Development
Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund and the 
United Nations Office for
Project Services
Distr.: General
11 July 2014
Original: English
1457366 (E) 210714
Second regular session 2014
2-5 September 2014, New York
Item 4 of the provisional agenda
Country programmes and related matters
Country programme document for Afghanistan (2015-2019)
# I.Programme rationale
1. The Afghanistan ‘Transformation Decade’ begins in 2015. With presidential 
elections in 2014, the withdrawal of international troops, and the closure of 
provincial reconstruction teams, Afghanistan continues its journey towards selfreliance. The coming years will be marked by the full sovereignty of Afghanistan
over its political, security and development processes. The international community 
and the United Nations will continue to support Afghanistan, as exemplified in the 
Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework and the Chicago commitments on 
development and security. As Afghanistan enters its Transformation Decade, UNDP 
should also transition to meet emerging priorities and operational challenges, guided 
by the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and the new strategic 
plan, 2014-2017.
2. Considerable development gains have been made since 2001, despite the 
continued insurgency in parts of the country — a conflict that led to close to 9,000 
civilian casualties in 2013. Presidential elections were held in 2004, 2009 and 2014, 
the writ of the state has expanded across the country, and socio-economic 
development has led to growth in gross domestic product per capita from $186 in 
2002 to $688 in 2012. The Millennium Development Goals Report, 2012, suggests 
that Afghanistan should be able to achieve the Millennium Development Goals for 
education and health by its target year, 2020. Over 30 per cent of central 
government employees are women, and 28 per cent of the seats in the national 
parliament are reserved for women. With regard to proxy indicators used to 
determine multidimensional poverty levels, health and education show considerable 
improvement: infant mortality rates declined by more than 50 per cent between 2003 
and 2012, and net enrolment in primary school rose from 54 per cent in 2003 to 
77 per cent in 2013. 
3. Progress has been uneven, however, across development sectors, between 
income groups, between men and women, and between rural and urban areas, and 
the country still faces conditions of fragility, a reduction of economic growth, and, 
currently, an acute cash crisis. Based on an analysis of development needs and 
guided by national development policies, as reflected in the United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework, the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework, 
the national priority programmes and the emerging ‘New Deal’ agenda, as well as 
the lessons learned reflected in the assessment of development results and the 
United Nations common country assessment, the United Nations family and partners 
have agreed to five outcomes to address fragility in its many dimensions and the 
root causes of conflict: (a) equitable economic development; (b) social services; 
(c) social equity and investment in human capital, (d) justice and the rule of law; 
and (e) accountable governance. Responding to the Kabul Conference request for a 
unified United Nations system, the United Nations country team has committed to 
increasing the effectiveness of the system. Furthermore, UNDP is supporting the 
implementation of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States principle s with 
the Ministry of Finance. The five New Deal peacebuilding and state building goals, 
leading to conflict transformation, will act as a foundation for progress towards the 
national priority programmes and will guide the Government towards inclusive, 
country-led and country-owned strategies. As part of the New Deal, and in line with 
the Monterrey, Rome, Paris, Accra and Busan aid effectiveness principles, UNDP is 
engaging in better aid management to gradually align development financing with national priorities, donor initiatives, country systems and accountability systems 
such as the Development Assistance Database, and is ensuring harmonized, sectorwide approaches to the allocation of resources.
4. The outcome areas of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework 
suggest that interventions are most effective when the responsibilities of duty -
bearers and the rights of claim-holders are addressed. For peacebuilding to succeed, 
moreover, development solutions must tackle the root causes of conflict and 
exclusion. UNDP will follow an issues-based approach addressing some of the key 
links and the nexus between conflict and better governance, and between poverty 
and community resilience. As the assessment of development results highlights, 
UNDP work across a range of governance and rule of law issues at the national and 
subnational levels is seen as particularly valuable, and of clear comparative 
advantage in Afghanistan. Yet UNDP achieved only limited results in increased 
opportunities for income generation, pointing to a need to intensify its work in the 
area of sustainable livelihoods for poverty reduction and, where possible, regional 
and triangular cooperation. A conflict development analysis conducted by UNDP in 
2013 — which helped identify root causes of conflict in Afghanistan — underscores 
the need to work towards poverty reduction and accountable governance. The 
assessment identified several causes of conflict and fragility. They include 
patronage-based politics, political exclusion, economic insecurity, ineffective 
governance, a weak state justice system, and unequal distribution of scarce 
livelihood resources.
5. Governance deficits are both a cause and a consequence of fragility. 
Accountable governance at all levels must be promoted to address exclusion in 
Afghanistan. The role of Parliament and subnational governance institutions must be 
consolidated, and a strong link between state institutions, civil society and the 
private sector forged, to strengthen peacebuilding. Governance institutions need 
time to mature to enable state services to reach all citizens. Due primarily to 
concerns about capacity and corruption, significant international assistance bypasses 
government systems. This has led to the creation of parallel structures and, notably, 
a ‘parallel civil service’. To assist in strengthening the primary civil service, UNDP 
will ensure that its capacity development efforts do not lead to capacity substitution. 
It has already aligned its support with the national technical assistance policy.
UNDP has been an active player in accountable governance since 2002. Having 
supported, effectively, all presidential and parliamentary elections, increased the 
capacity of parliament and strengthened subnational governance at the provincial 
and district levels, UNDP will deepen its engagement in participatory approaches 
and will work closely with national partners, including the Afghanistan Independent 
Human Rights Commission.
6. Access to justice and the rule of law emerges as an area where Afghan men 
and women have high expectations. The police, numbering close to 150,000 men 
and women, will gradually transition from their paramilitary role to a more civilian 
one aimed at promoting the safety and security of all citizens. In light of lessons 
from the Justice and Human Rights in Afghanistan project, this must be achieved in 
a framework of stronger governance of the justice sector and the police in order to 
strengthen the entire justice chain and address corruption, taking into account the 
unique nature of Afghanistan with its plural legal traditions. A survey conducted by 
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the High Office of Oversight and 
Anti-corruption in 2012 found that 73 per cent of Afghan people consider the court system to be the most corrupt state institution. Afghanistan needs significant support 
to meet human rights standards and the legal obligations as enshrined in its 
Constitution. The largest UNDP programme in the world, the Law and Order Trust 
Fund for Afghanistan, involves supporting the police, through payroll and the 
Ministry of Interior, in making the transition from a paramilitary force to a civilian 
police service. This, together with support to the Ministry of Justice and access to 
justice initiatives, especially for women, will constitute an integrated approach to 
justice sector reform and development. The Law and Order Trust Fund itself, as a 
major financial disbursement mechanism, needs to be redefined.
7. Economic development and poverty alleviation through area-based approaches 
and regional and South-South cooperation to address exclusion, the ‘youth bulge’, 
and community resilience are also essential for progress. About 36 per cent of the 
Afghan population live below the national poverty line, a situation that has 
remained unchanged in over six years. The share of the working population in 
vulnerable employment is 79 per cent for men and 87 per cent for women 
(2011-2012), highlighting the fragility of the economy and the potential for large 
parts of the population to fall further into poverty when confronted with shocks or 
natural disasters. Since over 80 per cent of the population depend on natural 
resources for their livelihoods — in a socio-political environment dominated by 
patronage networks — poverty reduction in Afghanistan requires direct intervention 
to ensure equitable access to assets such as land and water. Furthermore, about 
250,000 Afghan people are affected by natural disasters yearly, and the country has 
650,000 conflict-induced internally displaced persons. Large rural populations 
remain without access to affordable energy, vital for local economic development. 
UNDP already provides support to all provinces, and about 80 per cent of all 
districts, to improve planning, budgeting and implementation of a produc tive 
infrastructure more conducive to local development. This support should be scaled 
up to address issues of income generation and sustainable livelihoods, especially for 
young people, through entrepreneurship development and employment creation. 
UNDP will also enhance the provision of energy, support environmental governance 
and build resilience to climate change and disasters.
8. In 2012, the Gender Inequality Index listed Afghanistan 147th out of 
148 countries. Women are often the most vulnerable to the effects of conflict and 
poverty, and regularly face gender-based violence. Despite some improvement in 
women’s conditions, social, cultural and religious practices continue to limit their 
rights and quality of life. Building on the foundations of a gender equality project 
and gender mainstreaming across its entire portfolio during recent years, UNDP will 
select critical ministries and certain key provinces to advocate for Security Council 
resolutions 1325 and 2122 and to promote women’s empowerment and the 
monitoring mechanism to ensure that national and international legislation and 
rights are protected, with special attention to gender-based violence. The 
Millennium Declaration acknowledged that gender equality is both a goal in itself 
and a condition for achieving the other Millennium Development Goals. The 
National Risk and Vulnerability Assessment, 2011-2012, noted that only 19 per cent 
of the working-age women are currently active in the labour market, compared to 
80 per cent of men. Finally, although the number of registered cases of violence 
against women has decreased slightly, from 6,796 cases in 2008 to 6,000 in 2012, 
the actual number of incidents of violence against women, as the Government 
acknowledged in the Millennium Development Goals Report, 2012, is much higher, as a large number of incidents go unreported. The data clearly indicate that although 
some progress has been made in the condition of women, especially girls, those 
gains remain fragile and reversible.
9. The outlook for Afghanistan over the course of the country programme is 
uncertain, due to a range of economic, social, political, and security challenges. The 
international community plays an important role in helping the country navigate this 
period from transition to transformation and achieve the goal of self-reliance. The 
years to come will be characterized by a reduced international footprint and a likely 
reduction in the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan 
(UNAMA). As the focus of assistance from the international community evolves 
from supporting security and stabilization to sustainable development and resilience, 
UNDP is planning its interventions based on assumptions derived from discussions 
of possible future scenarios. UNDP will increase its added value by rebalancing its 
programme and maintaining a flexible stance. This will be accomplished based on a 
flexible regional presence, innovative and expanding partnerships and funding 
sources, and nimble risk management. As part of the new United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework, UNDP and United Nations partners will 
identify how to work together by geographical sector and area. At the national level, 
UNDP will focus on electoral processes and seek to build government capacity to 
assume responsibility for the management of a civilian police force. To address 
disparities across the country, UNDP will strengthen livelihoods and community 
resilience at the subnational level, and will assist Afghanistan in tackling poverty 
and sustaining economic gains. UNDP will address the marginalization of women 
and vulnerable groups by strengthening its work with state and non-state actors, 
civil society and local communities. It will seek to diversify its funding partners, 
focusing initially on the Global Environment Facility and the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. The impact of UNDP work will bring greater 
political, social, and economic opportunities for all Afghans, better systems for 
accountable governance through the rule of law, and social inclusion. UNDP 
commits to allocate 15 per cent of its resources to gender equality and women’s 
empowerment.
#II. Programme priorities and partnerships 
10. The country programme seeks to achieve transformational change in an 
environment of great complexity and insecurity. UNDP will continue to adapt to a 
changing national context in four of the five United Nations Development 
Assistance Framework outcomes outlined below, and will take on leadership or 
facilitation roles in those areas as requested. Conflict sensitivity will be applied 
throughout the programme and will be mainstreamed in all projects. Political, 
economic, and conflict analysis of the provinces where UNDP is working will be 
undertaken through its regional hubs at the subnational level. This will be 
accompanied by greater use of national systems, a focus on capacity development 
instead of capacity substitution, and assistance with phasing out parallel structures 
and strengthening approaches to regionalization. For each country programme 
outcome, UNDP will prepare an outcome strategy document, in consultation with all 
partners and the new Government and in the light of the evolving UNAMA mandate 
after 2015.11. UNDP will ensure that four cross-cutting parameters or guiding principles are 
addressed in the outcome strategies of the country programme to be prepared after 
the document has been approved. They are: 
(a) Area-based approaches for better targeting of beneficiaries. 
Socio-economic and baseline analysis in pilot regions and provinces will be carried 
out to ensure that direct benefits accrue to policymakers, the poor, women, and other 
selected beneficiaries, such as internally displaced persons. Participatory planning 
will foster community ownership, leading to sustainable interventions through 
conflict-sensitive programming, the rights-based approach and ‘do no harm’ 
principles.
(b) Scalability of results and use of multidisciplinary approaches. Using an 
issues-based approach, UNDP will ensure that synergies between outcomes and 
fields of work are established to ensure accelerated progress towards specified 
goals, fostering development impact and social cohesion.
(c) Partnership building. This will involve a greater use of state and 
non-state actors in Afghanistan, and at the regional and global levels through SouthSouth cooperation, to ensure that the best national and international comparative 
experience can be integrated into the country programme outcome areas of work.
(d) Use of national systems and ‘Serving as One’. Serving as One 
approaches incorporating the use of integrated work plans and joint programmes, 
coordinated through outcome-specific inter-agency working groups, have been 
agreed to.
12. Outcome 1 of the country programme document, on accountable governance, 
addresses governance deficits and responds to the need to strengthen the 
accountability of institutions and promote civil service reform, with special 
attention to selected regions and provinces. UNDP will seek to promote:
(a) Inclusive political processes and representative institutions. In 
coordination with UNAMA, UNDP electoral cycle support will assist national 
institutions in the better management of presidential, parliamentary and local 
election processes. UNDP is already a partner of the key electoral bodies. UNDP 
will support the National Assembly in building capacities to deliver on its 
constitutional mandate. At the subnational level, UNDP will engage with the new 
Government to discuss policy options, including on fiscal decentralization and 
accountability mechanisms, for improved participation and inclusive decisionmaking, including by acknowledging the specific role of traditional governance 
systems such as Shuras and Jirgas in the Afghan context. UNDP is also planning to 
strengthen the capacities of elected provincial councils, district coordination 
councils and municipal boards. This will further the institutionalization of 
democratic processes as well as ensure equitable economic development and 
promotion of justice, the rule of law and women’s rights as core priorities of UNDP 
development interventions at the subnational level.
(b) Institutional capacity for peace-building. Building on the Afghanistan 
Peace and Reintegration Programme and possible successor arrangements, UNDP 
will adopt a two-pronged approach to address the root causes of conflict: (i) At the 
national level, UNDP will work closely with UNAMA and the Ministry of Finance 
to support policy formulation, including through the use of such tools as the 
implementation of the New Deal agenda and the incorporation of peacebuilding and state building indicators into government planning processes; and (ii) At the 
provincial and district levels, UNDP will promote community-centred solutions to 
conflict through mediation efforts by provincial councils, district coordination 
councils, as well as involving traditional Shuras and Jirgas, and will facilitate 
equitable local access and management of natural resources. With UNDP support, 
district coordination councils will be established by the Government in three 
provinces initially, and will then be progressively scaled up based on access and 
security conditions. As was highlighted in a risk analysis report prepared for UNDP 
in 2013, the country office will develop typologies for cross-cutting and politically 
sensitive risks when addressing peacebuilding interventions. Risk management 
approaches would guide the scalability of these interventions.
(c) Capacity development for better service delivery. UNDP will assist in 
improving technical capacities in key ministries and governance bodies at the 
central as well as the subnational level. Capacities for planning, budget execution, 
transparency and accountability are a priority. This will include anti-corruption 
initiatives. Key partners will include the Civil Service Commission, the World Bank 
and the United Nations country team, to ensure harmonization of efforts. At the 
subnational level, support provided to provincial governors’ offices will be 
deepened through an area-based approach at the district level, in accordance with 
the UNDP regionalization strategy. This will include at least 50 per cent support 
provided through the national budget, a minimum of 80 per cent alignment to the 
national priority programmes, and collaboration with the ‘capacity-building for 
results’ initiative of the World Bank, which aims to enhance the service delivery 
capacities of key line agencies. UNDP, together with other donors, has been engaged 
in helping the Ministry of Finance to prepare the first public financial management 
roadmap and will provide support in the formulation of the second. The public 
financial management action plan will set out the government agenda to strengthen 
effective delivery of the national budget and increase transparency and 
accountability so as to advance anti-corruption initiatives, making use of SouthSouth and triangular cooperation.
13. Outcome 2 of the country programme document, on justice and the rule of 
law, seeks to expand trust in access to justice systems, with a particular focus on 
marginalized people and the poor; support institutional reform and legislative 
development; and increase civilian oversight over the police and the justice system. 
With the objective of increasing trust in, and access to, the fair, effective, and 
accountable rule of law, two intervention areas are envisaged: 
(a) Justice and police governance. UNDP will build on its support to 
national sector-wide reforms and continue its collaboration with UNAMA and other 
actors, including members of the Rule of Law and Justice Donor Group, working in 
the areas of justice and police governance to enhance trust in justice institutions. 
Linkages between the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of Justice, the Attorney 
General’s Office, and the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, and between formal and 
informal justice service providers, will ensure policy harmonization, as 
recommended by the Assessment of Development Results which recognizes 
UNDP’s clear comparative advantage. Within the Ministry of Interior and the 
Ministry of Justice, reforms in core planning processes, as well as finance, budget 
execution and human resource management, will be supported. In the Ministry of 
Interior, police professionalization and capacity development, linked to the national 
police programme and the five-year strategic plan of the Ministry, will allow government to take responsibility for the police payroll, where a transfer to 
government is planned based on a jointly agreed capacity development assessment 
and risk management strategy. In the Ministry of Justice, UNDP will continue to 
assist the human rights support unit to expand human rights-compliant laws. 
External oversight of justice and the police will be strengthened through the 
Independent Human Rights Commission, civil society and parliament. Capacity 
development support to the parliamentary committee on finance and budgets will 
assist parliament in its oversight of the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of 
Interior. In coordination with the national working group on rule of law indicators, 
UNDP will support the formulation and monitoring of indicators on the 
effectiveness of justice services as well as the human rights due diligence policy on 
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces. Control and 
complaints mechanisms will be supported to reduce maladministration, abuse of 
authority and misconduct.
(b) Access to justice and police services. UNDP will focus on scaling up and 
improving the civil, criminal and administrative justice services. This will involve 
strengthening coordination throughout the justice chain, including the Ministry of 
Interior and the Ministry of Justice. The capacity of the national police remains a 
weak link in the criminal justice chain, and UNDP, in coordination with other 
groups active in the police sector, will focus on the development and 
implementation of an Afghan-led police professionalization strategy. Literacy, 
criminal investigations, violence against women, collaboration with prosecutors, 
juvenile justice, and community-oriented policing will be important components of 
this approach. UNDP will work with the United Nations Children’s Fund and 
UNFPA to address the special needs of minors and women. Starting with 10 districts 
across six target provinces in 2015, UNDP will scale up its interventions to
100 districts across 20 provinces in five years, in line with its regionalization 
strategy and according to access and security conditions and application of risk 
management approaches.
14. Outcome 3 of the country programme document promotes development that is 
equitable and inclusive. It seeks to address the high levels of poverty and 
vulnerability throughout the country, focusing on women and youth, who face 
greater poverty and are more vulnerable. Poverty exists across all regions, and the 
poorer provinces are often the most inaccessible. The outcome will include new 
approaches to conflict prevention and resilience by increasing equitable access to 
natural resources and addressing climate change adaptation and disaster risk 
management. A three-pronged approach will be followed:
(a) Sustainable livelihood opportunities. UNDP will undertake initiatives to 
facilitate local economic development in an inclusive manner by helping to create 
better economic opportunities for vulnerable populations, especially women and 
unemployed youth, through area-based approaches linked to provincial and district 
development plans, which UNDP has been engaged in since 2002 through the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development. UNDP seeks to work with local 
governance bodies, civil society partners and private sector institutions to promote 
economic opportunities at the local level. At the national level, UNDP will support 
key economic policies called for in the national priority programmes related to 
regional integration and economic cooperation. At the provincial and district levels, 
UNDP will promote livelihood opportunities in the rural economy by strengthening 
the marketable skills of unemployed youth, promoting the development of entrepreneurship, supporting small-scale infrastructure, and fostering access to 
markets and sharia-compliant finance. This could include targeted support to 
durable solutions for displaced populations, and it is expected to discourage poppy 
cultivation. As part of larger efforts of regional integration, UNDP may undertake 
studies and provide policy advisory services to strengthen the efforts of those 
involved in the Istanbul Process, the Istanbul Programme of Action for Least 
Developed Countries, and possibly the Central Asia Regional Economic 
Cooperation Programme. South-South and triangular cooperation with Tajikistan 
and other central Asian countries is already taking place in areas such as 
employment and local trade. Expanding the domestic revenue base is a government 
priority, and it is anticipated that the extractive industries will create revenue 
streams for development financing. Communities will be identified based on food 
insecurity and poverty levels, and in discussions with provincial development 
councils and district coordination councils, with a phased approach linked to the 
UNDP regionalization strategy. 
(b) Improved access to energy and natural resources and enhanced 
environmental governance. UNDP will deepen its engagement in issues that directly 
address access to natural resources and their equitable management. Environmental 
governance at governmental and community levels, as an integral component of 
sustainable development, will be strengthened thorough policies, plans and legal 
instruments as new opportunities with the Global Environment Facility are 
identified. The promotion of off-grid, community-managed and owned, clean and 
renewable energy services will be a specific focus area. Initial pilot projects will 
target seven provinces for three years. Those provinces will be identified by the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, the Ministry of Energy and 
Water, and UNDP, based on energy deficits, need, and potential for energy 
generation. Work will be scaled up after three years. Policy-level work in this sector 
will include the development of legal and regulatory instruments for rural energy at 
the village level, as well as improving the interface between the national and 
village-level energy structures. In the extractive industries sector, UNDP will work 
on an initiative with the World Bank, the National Environmental Protection 
Agency, the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock, and the Ministry of 
Mines, to reduce the negative effects of mining on ecosystems and to ensure 
community involvement. 
(c) Resilience to natural disasters and enhanced adaptation to emerging 
climate change priorities. UNDP will assist in establishing national and communitybased early warning systems which, together with mainstreaming risk management 
into local development plans, will enhance the resilience of communities both to 
rapid-onset natural disasters and, more generally, to climate change in the medium 
to long term. National climate change policies, as well as five disaster-prone 
provinces, will be identified, in collaboration with the Afghanistan National Disaster 
Management Authority and the United Nations Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs, to strengthen the humanitarian-development nexus. The 
provinces will be selected based on their risk profile and their susceptibility to high 
climate change impact. Support will be scaled up to 10 provinces by the end of the 
programme period. Policy formulation work will include assistance on finalizing a 
climate change strategy and action plan with the National Environmental Protection 
Agency, while regional cooperation for disaster risk management will be pursued 
through the Istanbul Process. It is expected that, during the country programme cycle, most provinces and about 50 per cent of the districts in the country will be 
targeted under the three outputs of this outcome.
15. Outcome 4 of the country programme document addresses social equity, with 
special attention on women. It responds to the political, economic, and social 
inequalities between Afghan men and women, and continuing gender-based 
discrimination and violence. Gender will be mainstreamed into all outcomes. In 
cooperation with the Ministry of Women’s Affairs, UNAMA and UN-Women, 
UNDP will focus on three interventions:
(a) Government capacity to meet women’s rights. UNDP will support the 
Government in implementing legal commitments, both national and international, 
that affect the lives of women. UNDP will work with select ministries and advocate 
for Security Council resolutions 1325 and 2122. Working at the planning and policy 
level, six pilot ministries will be assisted in ensuring that women’s empowerment 
priorities are incorporated into the formulation of their budgets and multi-year 
sectoral plans at both the national and subnational levels. To increase the 
responsiveness of government ministries to citizens’ rights, UNDP supports 
advocacy, through civil society organizations and women’s groups, for the inclusion 
of emerging citizen priorities in national and subnational planning frameworks.
(b) Enhance monitoring and oversight of the national women’s agenda. In 
addition to the capacity to implement technical and financial support, in partnership 
with civil society organizations, through advocacy measures, UNDP will strengthen 
the capacity of the Ministry of Women’s Affairs and civil society organizations to 
monitor and report on the implementation of the international and national 
commitments of the Government. UNDP will make use of new technology and 
knowledge-sharing platforms, such as cooperation exchange mechanisms, to achieve 
that aim. UNDP will assist in the establishment of a database to monitor the 
progress of the National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan, to be used for 
evidence-based policymaking, budgeting, and reporting.
(c) Strengthen enforcement of legislation on violence against women. 
Prevention of gender discrimination and gender-based violence will be addressed 
through capacity development interventions to ensure that the Government is able to 
implement the recommendations of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms 
of Discrimination against Women. At the subnational level, elimination of violence 
against women units, family response units and legal help centres, already 
established to support the national elimination of violence against women law, will 
help strengthen the justice chain, improve links with civil society organizations, and 
respond to gender-based violence.
16. Recognizing the challenge of access at the subnational level due to insecurity 
and limited infrastructure, and the need to ensure closer monitoring of projects and 
interactions with beneficiaries, UNDP is implementing a regionalization strategy 
that will transform UNDP project-based hubs into UNDP regional sub-offices. This 
will be complemented by partnership and communication strategies and a risk 
management strategy — which are being developed — that will propose an outreach 
model at the regional and provincial levels, in addition to approaches for scaling up 
interventions. The UNDP regional hubs will be co-located with other United Nations 
organizations, where possible, to guide area-based programming and synergies 
among outcomes. Eight hubs have been established (Balkh, Bamyan, Helmand, 
Herat, Kandahar, Kunduz, Nangarhar and Paktia). Greater proximity to communities will enable UNDP to better assess needs, improve targeting of interventions, collect 
better-quality data, and facilitate the monitoring of activities. Regionalization will 
improve programme synergies and increase operational efficiency thanks to 
clustering and common premises and services. It will also strengthen coordination 
with other United Nations organizations. While this regionalization strategy presents 
certain risks related to security, access, oversight capacity and financial 
sustainability, the sub-offices, by improving interactions with local partners, 
collecting better local knowledge and data, and conducting provincial conflict 
analysis, will allow programmes to be scaled up and expanded through scenario 
planning when security conditions and infrastructure become more favourable. 
17. UNDP will increasingly focus on ‘upstream’ policy-level engagement, 
gradually moving away from service delivery functions that may substitute for 
government capacity. Bilateral partners will be involved in providing inputs to the 
strategic direction of UNDP at the outcome level, in the light of existing donor 
programmes in those areas — as well as with respect to management results, 
including regionalization and risk management. This will be done through use of 
such forums as a strategic high-level meeting every two months, chaired by the 
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General/Resident Representative, 
and, at a more technical level, through the Donor Advisory Group and engagement 
in donor coordination groups such as the rule of law and justice donor group. 
Mechanisms such as joint provincial visits and sharing of data from sub-offices 
would be additional means of cooperation. Recognizing the importance of regional 
cooperation for Afghanistan, UNDP will increasingly rely on arrangements for 
South-South and triangular cooperation, both at the project level and in multilateral 
policy-level frameworks. Engagement in the Istanbul Process will be increased, and 
support will be provided to national institutions to implement two ‘confidencebuilding measures’ related to (a) trade, commerce and investment opportunities, and 
(b) disaster management.
18. As the assessment of development results notes, UNDP must increase its ties 
with civil society, both as a means of delivering its programmes and to enhance 
accountability, counter corruption, and promote gender equality. Supporting claimholders at the local level, UNDP will assist in empowering communities through 
awareness-raising and capacity development to increase their access to services and 
fulfilment of their rights. This could include people with disabilities and those living 
with HIV. This will be done through various channels, including the establishment 
of a United Nations Volunteers-supported national volunteer programme to mobilize 
youth in development, with access to resources from funds such as the Global Fund. 
At the central level, UNDP engages with civil society organizations through the 
newly established Civil Society Advisory Committee, through which the 
organizations provide strategic as well as technical input to UNDP programmes. In 
relevant areas, UNDP will increasingly reach out and include private sector 
representatives, such as chambers of commerce, as members of local consultative 
mechanisms, encouraging them to mobilize finance to support local economic 
development.
#III. Programme and risk management 
19. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national 
results and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and resources assigned to the programme at the country level. 
Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional and headquarters levels with 
respect to country programmes are prescribed in the UNDP programme and 
operations policies and procedures and its internal controls framework. National 
execution will be the preferred modality, to be replaced by direct execution for all or 
part of the programme if required to enable response to major capacit y weaknesses 
and/or force majeure. Specific implementation modalities will be agreed upon with 
Government and will be selected depending on need and capacity. 
20. The country office will rearrange its internal programme structure to deliver 
the four outcomes, and each outcome will be housed in one programme team. This 
will increase programme coherence and allow for an issues-based approach to 
providing development solutions. Operational changes will be made following the 
UNDP global clustering strategy, with key functions shifting to consolidated service 
centres in various regions — in the case of Afghanistan, to Kuala Lumpur and 
Bangkok. This will assist with service efficiency and effectiveness. Working in 
support of the Serving as One approach, UNDP will work with the United Nations 
Country Team and the programme management team to implement United Nations 
Development Assistance Framework integrated work plans. UNDP will support joint 
capacity assessments and a common approach to risk management, ensuring full 
compliance with the principles of the harmonized approach to cash transfers. A 
United Nations Working Group is already active in this area. Initiatives such as 
co-location will be advanced through the United Nations Operations Management 
Team and in the light of changes in the UNAMA presence.
21. The most significant risks faced by UNDP are related to security, political, and 
fiduciary concerns, all of which will have to be addressed if the programme is to 
succeed. To facilitate a targeted risk mitigation strategy, UNDP has created three 
categories: strategic, external and internal risks. Strategic risks include political 
pressure, implementation modality constraints, and limitations related to on-budget 
delivery mechanisms. External risks include reduced access at the subnational and 
community levels due to deterioration in security conditions, shrinking donor funds, 
weak infrastructure, limited capacity of implementing partners, and corruption. 
Internal risks include staff turnover and capacity, and inadequacy of oversight and 
accountability measures and financial management systems. The impact of these 
could include reputational loss, mismanagement of funds, inefficiency in 
programme interventions, and inability to implement, monitor and evaluate 
activities effectively. The transition in the Law and Order Trust Fund for 
Afghanistan, in particular, will require a targeted risk management approach.
22. The UNDP risk management strategy is based on a stronger partnership 
engagement and lessons learned from the assessment of development results, the 
activities of the Oversight and Compliance Unit, and the regular audits and spotchecks carried out regularly by the country office. Risk assessments, monitoring, 
and regular reviews will be undertaken with stakeholders. These will include the 
proactive use of programme criticality assessments and innovative approaches for 
data collection and analysis of results. These mechanisms will be built into project 
design, project approval processes, project monitoring requirements, performance 
assessments, and project closure mechanisms. In keeping with a cohesive United 
Nations approach, a risk management unit has been created within the Resident 
Coordinator’s Office to facilitate joint United Nations positioning and advocacy, and 
to provide tools and support mechanisms for risk management and risk sharing.23. To ensure continuity in the event of a security breakdown, a business 
continuity plan has been developed. The oversight and compliance unit in the 
country office is the primary body to ensure the implementation of risk management 
systems. UNDP has also established a dedicated audit and investigations capacity, 
and programme criticality levels have been established for UNDP activities, all of 
which are undertaken in compliance with this United Nations-wide framework. 
#IV. Monitoring and evaluation
24. Operating in a fragile context with high levels of insecurity, minimal local 
information management systems, and a lack of comprehensive, accurate data has 
been a key challenge for monitoring and evaluation efforts. Limited reach in many 
rural areas, combined with capacity constraints of the Government and local bodies 
in terms of information collection, make it difficult to undertake accurate needsbased planning and effective follow-up, monitoring and evaluation. These 
challenges have cost implications at the programme and project levels which will 
have to be addressed.
25. The new country programme will intensify efforts in monitoring and utilizing 
data collection to continuously assess impact. The organizational platforms used 
will include the Data for Development Group led by UNFPA, the United Nations 
Working Group on Monitoring and Evaluation, and UNDP subnational offices, in 
accordance with the regionalization strategy. UNDP will work with the Resident 
Coordinator’s office and the United Nations PMT to establish a consolidated data 
collection mechanism within the Resident Coordinator’s office. UNDP will also use 
the newly established Civil Society Advisory Committee as a mechanism through 
which to partner with selected civil society organizations to monitor programmes in 
their respective areas of expertise. Emphasis will be placed on ensuring that impact 
at the outcome level is monitored, so as to build on output-level measures of 
success.
26. The UNDP monitoring and evaluation system will build on project progress 
reports and reviews, as well as on outcome and programme evaluations. This will 
facilitate the validation of results, the generation of lessons learned and the 
continuous assessment of UNDP contributions to outcomes. It will enable UNDP to 
take advantage of new opportunities and adjust expectations in response to changes 
in the external environment, including security conditions. Specific monitoring and 
evaluation methods will include third-party monitoring, regular UNDP verification 
missions, and quantitative surveys. UNDP and the United Nations system as a whole 
will explore satellite surveillance, mobile phone monitoring, and the use of other 
innovative methodologies for monitoring in fragile and insecure environments. 
27. UNDP will support joint United Nations efforts to develop national 
institutional capacity to collect, update, analyse and utilize statistical and 
monitoring data to strengthen evidenced-based development policies and strategies 
through national systems. The country office will work with the Central Statistics 
Organization, and will use its periodic national risk and vulnerability assessment as 
a major source of subnational-level data. UNDP will support certain counterpart 
ministries in collecting data related to their sectors. This includes working with 
government agencies in developing systems for collecting, storing and analysing 
data related to monitoring government commitments as part of the Afghanistan 
country programme.