File Name: ALB-NETS-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Albania
Country Code: ALB
Category: NETS
Document Title: L’Agence française de développement and Energy Efficiency
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2019
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2022
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

L’Agence française de développement  and Energy Efficiency Goal
« Accelerate the energy transition of developing countries 
towards energy services accessible to all, efficient and 
carbon-free »
#Axis 2: ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND DEMAND MANAGEMENT
1. Organizing energy sobriety in countries and territories.
• Planning for urban areas and transport;
• Optimize facilities and equipment in urban areas;
• Promote high energy-efficiency standards for buildings;
2. Developing an efficient and energy-efficient productive sector.
3. Supporting the implementation of demand-side management 
programmes.
100% Paris Agreement 
AND
100% Social link
#PROGRAMME FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN BUILDINGS (PEEB)
Transforming the building sector through 
financing, policy and capacity-building
Transforming the building sector through 
financing, policy and capacity-buildingFrench-German initiative launched in 
2018 implemented by GIZ, AFD and 
ADEME.
PEEB supports countries in their transition 
towards low-carbon, energy-efficient and 
resilient building sectors.
#PEEB(AFD, GIZ, ADEME)
• French-German initiative launched in 
2018 implemented by GIZ, AFD and 
ADEME.;
• PEEB supports countries in their transition 
towards low-carbon, energy-efficient and 
resilient building sectors.;
#Financing
• Project 
preparation;
• Setting-up 
financing;
• Project grants;
#Policy support
#Capacity-building
• Support to building 
sector actors;
#Knowledge
• International
agenda-setting;
• Knowledge sharing;
#Policy support
• Green Building 
Codes;
• NDC Roadmaps;
• National 
programmes;
#PEEB IMPACT TO DATE
• 35 projects
ongoing in 
over 20 countries;
• EUR 3bn
pipeline
identified to date;
• EUR 400M
climate co-benefits
in 2019-2020;
#PEEB 3 NEW INITIATIVES
#PEEB French Overseas Terr.
Project TA
starting in
2021.
TA facility only
available for 
public sector
project owners.
#PEEB Cool in preparation
GCF
Ongoing application
200 M EUR 
concessional loan
50 M EUR grant
For project TA and
institutional support.
#PEEB Med in preparation
DG NEAR
Ongoing application
24 M EUR 
investment grant
6 M EUR 
project TA
EE interventions in the region Georgia
 Since 2018: policy reform program to structure the electricity market in 
accordance with the EU directives, and develop the regulatory framework for 
renewable energies and energy efficiency;
 AFD support: multi-year program of Policy Based Loans to Georgia, with cofinancing from KfW and grant support from the European Union. Total AFD funding
is 355M€ (2018-2021);
 The reform should strengthen Georgia economy and embark in an energy
transition in full compliance with the Paris Agreement. The program pays a 
particular attention to the promotion of energy efficiency both on the supply and 
demand side. It is critical to promote market efficiency but also to mitigate the 
impact of tariffs increase on vulnerable customers. ;
 the program facilitated the adoption of energy efficiency and energy 
efficiency labelling laws in compliance with EU directives. ;
In the coming months, Georgian authorities should adopt the National Energy 
 Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) as well as several secondary acts to 
operationalize the reforms.;
 Since 2019: Policy-Based Loan in cofinancing with KfW to support energy 
sector reform, in line with EU Acquis. Total AFD financing: EUR 100M.;
 EUR 1.5M Technical Assistance Package, to support reform.;
 Includes: capacity-building program for the Energy Efficiency Agency (EEA), 
to improve structure, organization, performance and knowledge of the 
agency.;
 Upcoming PEEB Cool: Albania to be included in PEEB Cool, with funding 
dedicated (loans + grants) to EE improvement of public buildings.;
EE interventions in the region Moldova
 Latest addition to AFD’s geographical scope: July 2021;
 EE identified as key priority by the new government, to increase energy security by 
reducing energy consumption;
 A programme for rehabilitation of public buildings is currently under 
finalisation with support from EBRD, EIB and the EU, for 75 MEUR. Loan 
and grant agreements under this project expected to be signed by end2021, with implementation to start shortly after.;
 GoM request for AFD to provide complementary funding for this programme;
 AFD to assess possibility to provide loan + grant package to accelerate rate of EE 
renovation of buildings;