File Name: ARM-LCEDP-2020-EN
Year: 2020
Country Name: Armenia
Country Code: ARM
Category: LCEDP
Document Title: USAID ARMENIA LEAST COST ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PLAN: 2020-2036
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2020
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2036
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

ARMENIA LEAST COST ENERGY 
DEVELOPMENT PLAN: 2020-2036 
MARKET LIBERALIZATION AND ELECTRICITY TRADE (MLET) PROGRAM 
November 2019
#ACRONYMS 
ALWR Advanced Light Water Reactor ;
AMD Armenian Dram ;
ANPP Armenian Nuclear Power Plant ;
BWR Boiling Water Reactor ;
CAES Compressed Air Energy Storage ;
CCGT Combined-cycle Gas Turbines ;
CHP Combined Heat and Power ;
CJSC Close Joint Stock Company ;
DWG DecisionWare Group ;
ETSAP Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program ;
EU European Union ;
FEC Final Energy Consumption ;
GDP Gross Domestic Product ;
GDS Gas Distribution Stations ;
GEF Global Environmental Fund ;
GHG Greenhouse gases ;
GoA Government of Armenia ;
GTS Gas Transportation System ;
GWh Gigawatt Hour ;
HPP Hydro Power Plant ;
HVL High Voltage Lines ;
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency ;
IEA International Energy Agency ;
IEA-ETSAP International Energy Agency - Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program ;
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ;
IU BASE Initial Unconstrained Baseline Scenario ;
ktoe Kilotons of Oil Equivalent ;
kV Kilovolt ;
kWh Kilowatt Hour ;
LCEDP Least-cost Energy Development Plan ;
LFR Lead-Cooled Fast Reactors ;
LLC Limited Liability Company ;
LPG Liquefied Petroleum Gases MLET Market Liberalization and Electricity Trade ;
Mpkm Millions of passenger kilometers ;
Mtkm Millions of ton kilometers ;
MW Megawatt ;
MWh Megawatt Hour ;
NEA Nuclear Energy Agency ;
NEEAP National Energy Efficiency Action Plan ;
NPP Nuclear Power Plant ;
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA ;
O&M Operation and Maintenance ;
OCGT Open-Cycle Gas Turbines ;
OECD The Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development ;
PJ PetaJoule ;
PSRC Public Services Regulatory Commission ;
PV Photovoltaic ;
PWR Pressurized Water ;
RA MEINR Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources of the Republic of Armenia ;
RA Republic of Armenia ;
RD&D Research, Development and Demonstration ;
RES Renewable Energy Sources ;
SFR Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactors ;
SHPP Small Hydro Power Plant ;
SMR Small Modular Reactors ;
Sq. km Square Kilometer ;
SREP Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program ;
SRIE Scientific Research Institute of Energy ;
TFC Total Final Consumption ;
TIMES The Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System ;
TJ TeraJoule ;
TPES Total Primary Energy Supply ;
TPP Thermal Power Plant ;
USA United States of America ;
USAID United States Agency for International Development ;
USD US Dollar ;
VAT Value Added Tax VRES Variable Renewable Energy Sources ;
VVER-440 Water-water Energy Reactor ;
WB World Bank;
#EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
This Report presents the modelling framework, data, analyses and conclusions of the year-long activity 
undertaken by the Scientific Research Institute for Energy (SRIE), under sub-contract to Tetra Tech ES Inc. as 
the lead implementing partner for the USAID Market Liberalization and Energy Trade (MLET) Program, to 
prepare an update of the Armenia Least Cost Energy Development Plan (LCEDP) for the years 2020-
2036. This work utilized the Integrated MARKAL-EFOM System (TIMES) model which is an economic model 
generator for local, national, multi-regional, or global energy systems, developed and maintained under the 
auspices of the International Energy Agency’s Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program, which provides a 
technology-rich basis for representing energy dynamics over a multi-period time horizon. 
The TIMES model platform provides an integrated energy system modelling tool designed to guide policy 
formulation over a wide range of energy, economic and environmental planning and policy issues, helping to 
establish investment priorities within a comprehensive framework. Key features of the TIMES platform include 
that it encompasses the entire energy system from resource extraction through to end-use demands; employs 
least-cost optimization to identify the most cost-effective pattern of resource use and technology deployment 
over time; provides a framework to evaluate medium- to long-term policies and programs that can impact the 
evolution of the energy system; and quantifies the costs and technology choices that result from imposing those 
policies and program. Thus, the TIMES platform is specifically a tool to develop and compare scenarios for 
future energy development and as such can be a productive tool to foster stakeholder buy-in and build 
consensus around energy sector policy. 
In order to adapt the generic TIMES model to become the TIMES-Armenia model, the SRIE team first 
established as a base year that period for which there was a complete set of data on production and 
consumption of all energy carriers used in Armenia - the energy balance. In addition, for the base year it was 
necessary to establish the energy production and consumption technologies in all sectors of the economy and 
to analyze and subdivide the initial volumes of energy among all available end-use technologies. When work on 
the current project was initiated in August 2018, the most recent year for which all relevant data for the 
Armenian economy and energy sector were available was 2016. This was selected as the base year. Having 
calibrated the model to confirm that its 2018 results matched available data, the first stage of the scenariobuilding process was to establish the initial Baseline (or Reference) scenario for the period planning period 
2020 – 2036. 
#The Baseline Scenario 
The TIMES-Armenia modelling exercise started by imposing no constraints on the technology choice for future 
energy sector development. A key result of this exercise was to identify that expansion of variable renewable 
energy sources (VRES), in particular, solar and wind energy, are the clear least-cost sources for new generation 
capacity in Armenia, a clear reflection of the combination of Armenia’s rich solar resource and trends in 
declining cost of solar power over the planning period. Given that the initial unconstrained level of projected 
VRES capacity in the baseline scenario was so high, adding nearly 3,000 MW of grid-connected solar and over 
1,000 MW of wind power by 2036, it was clear that more reasonable levels of constrained expansion of VRES 
generation would be needed. Through expert consultation with stakeholders it was agreed that there was a 
need to reflect both potential limitations in the institutional capacity to build so much new solar and wind in 
the coming decades – which led to annual build-rate constraints - and in the need to ensure planning and investment for any system strengthening that would be required to accommodate higher rates of VRES penetration in the total generation mix. 
This consultation process established that a reasonable and ambitious level of constrained maximum VRES 
capacity to be modelled would be 1,500 MW of solar and 500 MW of wind until the end of the planning 
horizon, along with limits on the annual build rates. When this set of added constraints was applied to the 
baseline model, the results established the Baseline Reference (BASE-R) Scenario. 
In this BASE-R scenario, which foresees closure of the Armenia Nuclear Power Plant (ANPP) from 2027 
according to current planning - as was ultimately seen in all other scenarios as well - the full amount of 
constrained solar and wind capacity is added, reflecting the significant role of these VRES as the least-cost 
source of electricity for Armenia’s development. While some additional hydropower capacity was also added in 
the BASE-R scenario, no other types of new generation are selected by the model, taking into account that the 
gas-fired Yerevan CCGT-2 TPP has already been included from 2022. The total required funding for new 
power plant construction in the BASE-R scenario is just under $1.9 billion over the entire planning period, 
while projected expenditures on imported natural gas fuel for electricity generation are $4.25 billion. 
The fact that the full constrained amount of solar and wind capacity is selected by the 
model as part of the least cost solution for new generation under all scenarios 
underscores the importance to Armenia of ensuring a policy and institutional 
environment that supports full realization of new VRES generation to the maximum 
extent practicable, not only to ensure the lowest cost generation but also to minimize 
reliance on other imported energy sources and to strengthen Armenia’s energy 
security and competitiveness. 
#GDP Growth Sensitivities in the Baseline Scenario 
Considering that GDP growth is a key main driver of energy demand growth, two sensitivity analyses for the 
BASE-R scenario were modelled to explore the impacts of higher and lower GDP growth rates on the least 
cost development pathway of Armenia’s energy system. The particular cases analysed were for a 50% higher 
growth rate (i.e., 6.75% growth per year) and a 50% lower rate (i.e., 2.25% growth per year) as compared to 
the BASE-R scenario assumption of a 4.5% per annum GDP growth rate from 2022. 
While these higher (lower) growth rates had the expected impact in regard to increasing (decreasing) total 
system costs, total primary energy supply, final energy consumption and electricity generation, it was especially 
interesting to note that the higher GDP growth rate also reduced the share of total system cost in GDP, owing 
to the fact that it was accompanied by significant lowering of the energy intensity of a unit of GDP. In fact, the 
high-growth case of BASE-R projects an even lower level of total primary energy supply per unit of GDP than 
the scenario which explicitly pursued reduced final energy consumption through expanded energy efficiency. 
This enhanced efficiency was most clearly demonstrated in the fact that while overall GDP increases in total by 
27% compared to the BASE-R scenario, total system costs increase only by 12% and total primary energy 
supply by 6.3%. This reflects the fact that aggregate purchases of new energy demand devices increase by 
almost 19%, which embeds higher levels of efficiency over time as incomes rise. A surprising but crucial result from these sensitivity analyses is that the TIMESArmenia model projects no differences in the projected total of new power plant 
capacities in level or by type required to cover electricity demand over the full range 
of GDP growth variation. While there are slight variations in the implementation 
schedule for new solar, wind and hydro power capacity, the only effect of higher 
(lower) income growth lies in the increased (decreased) utilization of existing installed 
capacity of both VRES and gas-fired thermal power plants, with a concomitant 
increase (decrease) in expenditures on natural gas fuel.
#Nuclear Scenarios 
Activities to extend the operational lifetime of the ANPP up to 2027 are already in place and in the BASE-R 
Scenario the plant was to be decommissioned from that time. While available nuclear technologies included in 
the TIMES-Armenia model were not selected in the BASE-R Scenario on the basis of least cost, the GOAM 
remains committed to a policy to maintain some nuclear power in the country’s energy mix. To analyze the 
cost and other implications of these choices, four alternative scenarios for continued inclusion of nuclear 
generation in the Armenian power system were examined as: operating life extension of the ANPP for an 
additional 5 or 10 years after 2027; and forced implementation of a new nuclear unit, either with installed 
capacity 300 MW (Small Modular Reactor) or with installed capacity 600 MW (Light Water Reactor). 
The scenarios for life extension of the ANPP by 5 and 10 years decrease total system cost by around 1%, 
compared to eth BASE-R scenario, increase total primary energy supply by 3.7% and 7.3%, reduce greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions significantly by 4.5% and 9.3% and decrease imports of natural gas for electricity 
generation by 11.8% and 20.4%, respectively. A key feature of these scenarios is that they increase total 
investment costs for new power generation capacity 15.1% and 12.5%, compared the BASE-R scenario, with 
the higher investment costs needed for the longer extension being offset in its impact on total investment by 
the fact that in this scenario neither of the mid-sized HPPs (Shnokh and Loriberd) are built. The scenarios 
which propose new nuclear units to replace the ANPP from 2027 with either a 300 MW SMR or a 600 MW 
LWR increase total system cost by around 2%, increase primary energy supply by 3.3% and 7.8%, reduce GHG 
emissions by 7.1% and 12.2%, and decrease imports of natural gas for electricity generation by 7.2% and 15.5%, 
respectively. A key impact in these scenarios is that they significantly increase the required total investment 
costs for new power generation capacity compared the BASE-R scenario, more than doubling it to $4.1 billion 
(a 116% increase) for the 300 MW SMR unit and increasing it to over $5 billion (a 164% increase) for the 600 
MW LWR unit. Thus, whether considering total system cost or investment costs required for new generation, 
the scenarios for life extension of the ANPP represent a least-cost policy choice for continuing to maintain 
nuclear capacity in Armenia’ energy mix. It must be emphasized that such life extensions must first and 
foremost always ensure all measures required for the continued safe and reliable operation of these older 
plants. As a final point, it is useful to note that the scenarios which imposed GHG emissions 
reduction targets to meet the level defined in Armenia’s Nationally Determined 
Commitment, either by 2036 or earlier, largely mirror the “new nuclear” scenarios in 
terms of increases in total system cost and primary energy supply, reductions in GHG 
emissions and decreases in imports of natural gas for electricity generation. This is 
not surprising, given that in these scenarios, with the constrained amounts of solar 
and wind VRES fully utilized, the next choice for lower GHG-emissions generation 
leads to selection of the new nuclear technologies, in this case introduction of 600 
MW of nuclear power. Given the slightly different implementation patterns for 
introduction of nuclear units in these scenarios as compared to the forced 
implementation in 2027, the impact on total investment costs for new power 
generation capacity is even larger compared to the BASE-R scenario, ranging from 
$5.4 - $7.0 billion. 
#Scenarios with Lower Prices for Imported Natural Gas 
The BASE-R scenario assumed that the natural gas price will increase up to projected European levels by 2027 
(the year of ANPP decommissioning) and after that continue to match European levels. We also explored two 
scenarios with lower gas prices, starting from the same initial border gas price effective from January 1, 2019, 
of US$ 165 per 1000 m3 , which i) applied the EU trend growth rate over the entire period to 2036 from that 
starting point , and ii) assumed that the border gas prices grows to US$ 180/1000 m3 by 2027 and remains 
fixed at that level until the end of the planning period. 
These scenarios both show that if Russia continues to provide relatively low-cost natural gas to Armenia there 
will be a significant increase of natural gas consumption across all sectors, but mainly in electricity generation, 
transportation and residential heating. In both scenarios, the expanded use of existing gas-fired TPP capacity 
means that the mid-sized HPPs (Shnokh and Loriberd) are not built, while no additional thermal power capacity 
is required after the inclusion of Yerevan CCGT-2 (RENCO) and the closure of Hrazdan TPP. This results in a 
roughly 20% reduction in the lumpsum investment required for new generation in these scenarios as compared 
to the BASE-R scenario, the lowest in any scenarios. It is useful to note that the constrained levels of solar and 
wind generation are still fully built, which generates an investment cost saving as compared to BASE-R of $377 
million in the case with the EU trend to 2036 and of $391 million when the gas price is capped at $180. In 
both scenarios there is an overall increase in total primary energy supply by 1 - 1.5%, because of increased use 
of the cheaper imported natural gas which is accompanied by a reduction in use of VRES. 
While total energy system cost is reduced when gas prices are lower, it is important 
to note that the increased utilization of cheaper gas maintains and deepens Armenia’s 
dependence on imported energy.
#Scenarios to Promote Fuel Switching to Electricity in Transport and Heating 
The most consumed fuel source in Armenia is and will continue to be imported natural gas, most of which is 
used for residential heating and transport. Since increased electricity generation based on development of 
Armenia’s VRES is indicated as a least cost solution in the BASE-R scenario, and confirmed in all other 
scenarios, expanding use of these domestic energy resources could be accompanied by implementation of 
policies to stimulate use of electricity in the transport and residential sectors to replace natural gas imports. To 
explore these opportunities, we examined scenarios designed to increase the penetration level for use of 
electricity in residential heating to 25% in 2027 and to 50% by 2036, increase the penetration level for use of 
electric vehicles to 25% in 2027 and to 50% by 2036 and both of these scenarios taken together. 
Each of these scenarios proposing increased sectoral electricity penetration separately reduces total system 
cost (in combination by 3%), reduces total primary energy supply (again, in combination by 5%), lowers GHG 
emissions (by nearly 8%, in combination) and decreases imports of natural gas for electricity generation (in 
combination by 7.6%). Most importantly, no change in the overall level and type of new generation is required 
as compared to the BASE-R scenario in order to achieve these results, with only a negligible increase in 
lumpsum investment costs for new generation capacity associated with slight variations in the implementation 
schedule for projected additions of solar and wind power. 
The reduction in natural gas used for electricity generation shows clearly that a policy 
to promote increased deployment of electric for heating and electric vehicles will 
expand utilization of domestic VRES, reduce reliance on imported energy sources and 
strengthen Armenia’s energy security. 
#1.1 REPORT OVERVIEW AND DESCRIPTION OF THE ARMENIAN ENERGY SYSTEM IN THE MODELLING BASE YEAR 2016 
This Report presents the modelling framework, data, analyses and conclusions of the year-long activity 
undertaken by the Scientific Research Institute for Energy (SRIE), under sub-contract to Tetra Tech ES Inc. as 
the lead implementing partner for the USAID Market Liberalization and Energy Trade (MLET) Program, to 
prepare an update of the Armenia Least Cost Energy Development Plan (LCEDP) for the years 2020-2036. 
In order to adapt the generic TIMES model (see Chapter 2) so as to become the TIMES-Armenia model, it was 
necessary first to establish a base year (i.e., the first modelling year) for that period for which a complete set of 
data on production and consumption of all energy carriers used in the country - the energy balance - can be 
detailed. In addition, for the base year it is necessary to establish the energy production and consumption 
technologies in all sectors of the economy, and to analyze and subdivide the initial volumes of used energy 
among all available end-use technologies. When work on the current project was initiated in August 2018, the 
most recent year for which all relevant data for the Armenian economy and energy sector were available was 
2016, so this year was selected as the base year. For all projections, dollar costs and expenditures are 
reported in terms of 2016 dollars. The remaining sections of this Chapter summarize a description of the 
Armenian energy system in the modelling base year of 2016. 
Chapter 2 presents a brief summary of the platform and methodology for the generic TIMES model, which is an 
economic model generator for local, national, multi-regional, or global energy systems, developed and 
maintained under the auspices of the International Energy Agency’s Energy Technology Systems Analysis 
Program (IEA - ETSAP). This model provides a technology-rich basis for representing energy dynamics over a 
multi-period time horizon. Chapter 3 provides details on the specific application of the TIMES-Armenia model, 
confirming the calibration of the model to the year first modelled year (2018), confirming results to match 
available data, and presents the process of developing the initial Baseline (or Reference) scenario for the period 
planning period 2020 – 2036. 
With the Baseline-Reference scenario fully detailed, Chapter 4 outlines a set of selected alternative possible 
scenarios that were identified by key stakeholders as of interest, to reflect different potential pathways for the 
evolution of the Armenian energy system, including policy choices as well as sensitivity analyses to determine 
the possible impacts of variations in such factors as demand growth or energy processes. This set of scenarios 
is intended to be illustrative and not exhaustive and to provide useful inputs to policy and strategy development 
for the energy sector in Armenia over the period to 2036. Once the results of the various scenarios have been 
described and the differences in outcomes explored, Chapter 5 presents a set of summary conclusions and 
recommendations based on those results. Detailed information on various aspects of the model and data used 
is presented in the Appendices. 
#1.2 ARMENIAN ELECTRICITY GENERATION, TRANSMISSION AND CONSUMPTION IN 2016 
As summarized in Table 1.1, the total installed electricity generation capacity of the power system of Armenia 
in 2016 was approximately 3,267 MW, of which 2,710 MW was available, due to the conditions of aging of 
some plant and equipment, as well as of climate circumstances of the nuclear and thermal power plants locations. The main reasons for lower availability of nuclear and thermal power plants against installed capacities relate to the relatively low 
atmospheric density resulting by the altitude above sea level and dry and hot summers in Armenia, which have an influence on efficiency of these type of power plants.
The installed capacity of thermal power plants (TPPs) was 1,532 MW and total available TPP 
capacity was 1,030 MW.
#TOTAL INSTALLED AND AVAILABLE CAPACITY in 2016 in MW:
Armenian Nuclear Power Plant,440 and 385;
Hrazdan Thermal Power Plan (TPP), 810 and 370 ;
Hrazdan Unit 5 TPP, 480 and 440 ;
Yerevan Combined Cycle Gas Turbine, 242 and 220 
Sevan-Hrazdan Hydro Power Plant (HPP) Cascade, 560 and 560 ;
Vorotan HPP Cascade, 404 and 404 ;
Small Hydropower Producers (<30 MW), 328 and 328 ;
Wind Farm, 2.64 and 2.64 ;
TOTAL, 3,267 and 2,710 ;
The first unit of the Armenian Nuclear Power Plant (ANPP) was put into operation in 1976 and the second 
unit in 1980. Two reactors of the type VVER-440 (V-270) were installed, with an aggregate capacity of 815 
MW. Following the Spitak earthquake on December 7, 1988, operation of the ANPP stopped for safety 
considerations, although there was no technical damage to the plant. As a consequence of the severe energy 
crisis in Armenia during the years 1993-95, the ANPP Unit No. 2 was re-commissioned in 1995 with an 
installed capacity of 440 MW. In 2016, the available capacity of ANPP was 385 MW. 
The installed capacity of all hydropower plants (HPPs) in Armenia in 2016 was 1,293 MW, including 328 MW of 
small HPPs (size less than 30 MW). All the rivers of Armenia are in the Kura-Araks Basin, with 73.5% of the 
territory of Armenia in the Araks river basin. There are more than 200 rivers and streams in Armenia with a 
length of 10 km or more. The Hrazdan River, flowing out of Lake Sevan, and the Araks, Vorotan, and Debet 
Rivers have the most energy potential. According to the former Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural 
Resources, the potential water energy resources of Armenia are 21.8 billion kWh, including 18.6 billion kWh 
from large and medium-sized rivers, and 3.2 billion kWh from small rivers. Armenia’s hydropower resources 
are the country’s most widely used renewable energy resource. The main hydropower generation units in 
Armenia in 2016 were: 
 Sevan-Hrazdan HPP Cascade: The cascade comprises seven HPPs: Sevan (34 MW); Hrazdan (81 MW); 
Argel (224 MW); Arzni (70 MW); Kanaker (102 MW); Yerevan-1 (44 MW); and Yerevan-3 (5 MW), with 
a total installed capacity of 560 MW and designed to produce up to 2.32 billion kWh annually. The HPPs 
are all located on the Hrazdan River and use irrigation water flow from Lake Sevan and other tributaries 
of the Hrazdan River. ;
 Vorotan HPP Cascade: The cascade consists of three HPPs, all located on the Vorotan River in the 
territory of Syunik, which utilize both the river and stream waters. The cascade comprises Spandaryan 
HPP (76 MW), Shamb HPP (171 MW) and Tatev HPP (157 MW) with a total installed capacity of 404 
MW and a designed annual electricity generation of 1.16 billion kWh.;
 Small HPPs: Construction of small HPPs in Armenia has been a leading factor in the development of 
renewable energy resources, enhancing the energy security of Armenia. The majority of small HPPs 
under construction or in operation are run-of-river facilities designed for natural water flows. As of 
January 1, 2017, electricity was generated by 173 small HPPs, with total 328 MW installed capacity. In 
2016, the generation from small HPPs was around 937 million kWh, roughly 13% of total generation.;
In terms of other renewable energy resources, in 2016 Armenia’s system also had one wind farm with a 
capacity of 2.64 MW and at the end of the year there were a small number of solar PV plants installed, with 
capacity of 273 kW and annual generation less than 0.1 million kWh 
Data on aggregate electricity generation and consumption in 2016 are presented in Table 1.2. It should be 
noted that total technical losses in the electricity grid, including transmission and distribution networks, was 
just over around 10%. There was also electricity trade both to north and to south. 
#ELECTRICITY GENERATION AND CONSUMPTION IN 2016, in MILLION kWh:
Total Annual Generation 7,315.3 of which the Power plant own use/(% of total) has a share of 327.4/(4.5%) and Losses/(% of total net input) are 706.0/(10.1%).
Export is 1,226.4 and Import 272.6 while Final consumption is 5,328.2 with a Number of Consumers of ~ 985,000.
These numbers present the shares of electricity generation in 2016 by fuel, which shows that the ANPP, gas-fired 
power plants and renewables (including small HPPs and wind) were distributed almost equally in the total 
generation mix, each accounting for around one-third of the total. Figure 1.2 presents the amount of electricity 
generated for domestic use in 2016, with difference reflecting the fact that net exports are generally accounted 
for by gas generation, which increases the share of nuclear generation and of all renewables to 37% each, 
leaving 26% of electricity generation for domestic use dependent on imported gas.
The Armenian electricity transmission system is owned by the state company “High Voltage Electrical 
Networks” CJSC. In 2016, the total length of 220 kV and 110 kV High Voltage Lines (HVL) involved in 
electricity transmission was around 1,740 km (1,323 km of 220 kV HVL and 417 km of 110 kV HVL) and the 
number of substations was 33 (15 220 kV substations and 18 110 kV substations). The Armenia power system 
has interconnections with all neighbor countries, although those with Turkey and Azerbaijan were not in 
operation, due to political issues. Currently, construction of new 400 kV HVL both toward the North and the 
South is planned, which will expand opportunities both for exchange to neighboring power systems and to 
establish electricity transit among them. 
Electricity generated by power plants and transmitted by HVL reaches consumers through the distribution 
network, which comprises 110 – 35 - 6(10) - 0.4 kV lines and cables. The number of distribution customers in 
2016 was close to 985,000, all served by the sole distribution company “Electric Networks of Armenia” CJSC. 
The distribution network consisted of 2,778 km of lines and 102 substations at the 110 kV level; 2,307 km of 
overhead and 68 km of cable lines and 224 substations at the 35 kV level; and 20,917 km of overhead and 5,666 
km of cable lines and 8,162 substations at the 6(10) and 0.4 kV levels. 
Figure 1.4 shows the share of electricity consumption by economic sectors in 2016, using the terminology for 
sectors of the Public Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC). Three sectors account for over 90% of 
electricity consumption, with “Population” (i.e., Residential) as the largest at 35% of the total, followed by 
“Others” (comprising the Service/Commercial sector) at 30%, and Industry at 26%. The Transport sector only 
accounts for 2% of electricity consumption, although as will be seen it is a large consumer of final use energy. 
Clearly, in terms of understanding and projecting demand growth for electricity, these three sectors will be a 
key focus for in-depth modelling.
#1.3 NATURAL GAS IMPORTS, SUPPLY AND CONSUMPTION IN 2016 
Data for the main indicators of the natural gas supply system for 2016 are summarized in Table 1.3 below. The 
overall gasification level in Armenia at 95% is nearly complete; this means that almost all consumers have access 
to the gas system. Notwithstanding this fact, many people especially in rural communities still use biomass 
(wood and/or manure) for heating, cooking and hot water. The underground gas storage facility in Abovyan, 
which has capacity of around 140 million cubic meters (m3), provides an opportunity to regulate daily load 
fluctuations in heavy demand periods such as winter days, as well as to accumulate some amount of gas to 
provide uninterrupted supply in emergency situations. Finally, it should be noted that gas imports from Russia 
are used for all domestic needs (including electricity generation), while gas imports from the south are 
primarily used for electricity generation in the context of the swap contract. 
#MAIN INDICATORS OF NATURAL GAS SUPPLY, 2016
Armenia gasification level ~94.6 %;
Length of the pipelines, km 14,600;
Number of gasified communities 624;
Number of consumers 692,114;
Import, million m3, of which 2,237/2,372;
from Russia 1,865/2,001;
from Iran 372/371;
Abovyan Underground Gas Storage Facility 140 million m3;
Gasification in Armenia started from 1960 and as of 2016 the Russian firm Gazprom was the sole shareholder 
of CJSC Gazprom Armenia, which is the sole provider of supply and sales of natural gas for the domestic 
market. The bulk gas transportation system includes 1,682.2 km of main and branch gas pipelines, of which 
1,586.5 km of gas pipelines are involved in gas transportation activities and the rest is in operational reserve 
mode. There are also 110 gas distribution stations; 21 metering units, including the Koghb gas measuring 
station on the Armenia-Georgia border; 181 electrochemical protection installations, including 166 cathodic 
and 15 drainage systems. The Abovyan gas storage facility includes 21 underground tanks and compressor 
stations.
The main operational indicators of the gas transportation system for 2016 are shown in Table 1.4. Combined 
losses in the gas transportation and distribution systems amounted to around 143 million m3; at roughly 6.4% 
of total imported gas volume these are high, but typical for former Soviet Union systems. 
#MAIN INDICATORS OF THE GAS SUPPLY SYSTEM FOR 2016, in MILLION M3 
Volume of imported gas, including: 2,236.5 (From Russia 1,864.6,From South 372.0);
Gas taken from pipelines & underground storage : 50.2 ;
Own use of gas in transportation system: 3.5 ;
Losses in gas transportation system, 102.5; of which Technical losses in the pipeline are 102.0 and Emergency losses are 0.5;
Driven by gas pipelines & underground storage: 48.3 ;
Volume of transported gas: 2,132.4 ;
Other consumers: 244.4 ;
Distribution system: 1,888.1 ;
Own use of gas distribution system: 3.1 ;
Recovered gas: 0.7 ;
Gas distribution system losses: 40.1 ;
Volume of gas sold by distribution system, 1,844.3 , of which Population is 581.0, Energy is 420.0, Industry is 185.8, CNG compressor stations are 467.3, Budget organizations are 54.3, other consumers are 135.8 ;
Average calorific value of natural gas is 8,193 (kcal/m3);
Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC). ;
#1.4 USE OF OTHER ENERGY CARRIERS IN 2016 
Given that the TIMES model is a tool for optimizing all fuel and energy flows in a system, including production, 
transformation and consumption, it is necessary to analyze and incorporate all relevant data into the model. 
The best way to do this is to use the internationally approved country energy balance. This section presents 
the main data of the Armenian Energy Balance for the base year (2016), as officially published by International 
Energy Agency (IEA) (Source: 
https://www.iea.org/statistics/?country=ARMENIA&year=2016&category=Energy%20supply&indicator=TPESbyS
ource&mode=table&dataTable=BALANCES) 
Table 1.5 presents the Armenian Energy Balance for 2016, which includes also the amounts of other energy 
carriers used, in particular coal and oil. As with gas, practically all coal and oil products are imported from 
abroad (see Table 1.6). The cumulative share of those coal and oil products in Armenia’s Energy Balance is less 
than 10% and they do not play a significant role in the country’s economy. Almost three-quarters of oil 
products are used in transport, not only as fuel but also as lubricants. 
According to the IEA “World energy balances, 2018 edition, Database documentation” 
(http://wds.iea.org/wds/pdf/worldbal_documentation.pdf) these flows are defined as follows: 
 Total primary energy supply (TPES) is made up of production + imports - exports - international 
marine bunkers - international aviation bunkers ± stock changes. ;
 Transformation processes comprise the conversion of primary forms of energy to secondary and 
further transformation (e.g., coking coal to coke; crude oil to oil products; fuel oil to electricity). Inputs 
to transformation processes are shown as negative numbers and output from the process is shown as a 
positive number. Transformation losses will appear in the “total” column as negative numbers. ;
 Energy industry own use covers the amount of fuels used by the energy producing industries (e.g., for 
distribution). It includes energy consumed by energy industries for heating, pumping, traction and lighting 
purposes. ;
 Total Final Consumption (TFC) Is the sum of the consumption in end-use sectors and for nonenergy use. Energy used for transformation processes and for own use of the energy producing 
industries is excluded. Final consumption reflects for the most part deliveries to consumers. Note that 
international aviation bunkers and international marine bunkers are not included in final consumption 
except for the world total, where they are reported as world aviation bunkers and world marine bunkers 
in transport. ;
 Non-energy use covers those fuels that are used as raw materials in the different sectors and are not 
consumed as a fuel or transformed into another fuel. Non-energy use is shown separately in final 
consumption under the heading non-energy use. Note that for biofuels, only the amounts specifically 
used for energy purposes (a small part of the total) are included in the energy statistics. Therefore, the 
non-energy use of biomass is not taken into consideration, and the quantities are null by definition.;
#IMPORTED ENERGY CARRIERS IN 2016, KTOE
Brown coal 0.7 ;
Lubricants 6.2 ;
Anthracite 0.6 ;
Paraffin Waxes 0.4 ;
Liquefied petroleum gases (LPG) 4.5 ;
Bitumen 22.2 ;
Motor Gasoline excl. bio 146.7 ;
Other oil products 3 ;
Gasoline type jet fuel 0.0 ;
Natural Gas 1,847.4 ;
White spirit & SBP 0.1 ;
Fire wood 0.0 ;
Kerosene Type Jet Fuel excl. bio 44.8 ;
Solid biomass 6.0 ;
Other Kerosene 7.6 ;
Other biomass 0.2 ;
Gas/Diesel Oil excl. bio 121.3 ;
Electricity 23.7 ;
Fuel Oil 0.3 ;
TOTAL 2,235.7;
Finally, considering FEC by demand sector in 2016, the total FEC amounted to 2,094.6 kilotons of oil equivalent 
(ktoe), out of which the amount for households and transport together were just over 1,400 ktoe. The base 
year data outline the leading position of households, which accounted for 37% of total FEC, with transport 
second at almost 30%. In the base year, services and industry accounted for 15.6% and 15.3% of FEC, 
respectively, while agriculture had the smallest share in total FEC at 2%. Figure 1.7 shows all final energy 
consumption by sectors and types of fuel in 2016. Additional details on the composition of FEC in the base 
year are found in Appendix 1.
#1.5 ENERGY COSTS IN 2016 
Electricity and gas were fully regulated sectors in 2016 and the PSRC was responsible for setting tariffs. 
#1.5.1 ELECTRICTY TARIFFS FOR CONSUMERS 
Electricity tariffs for consumers were differentiated by day and night, as presented in Table 1.7. There was no 
differentiation by consumer types (e.g. industry, services, etc.), but only by connection voltage. There was also 
a special tariff class for poor consumers.
#1.5.2 ELECTRICITY GENERATION TARIFFS 
Tariffs for large electricity generation companies are shown in Table 1.8. These rates have a capacity and an 
electricity (energy) component. The capacity tariff is a payment that does not depend on the amount of 
electricity generated, while the electricity tariff is used for payment on kWh of electricity produced. 
To support development of renewable energy resources, the PSRC had also set feed-in tariffs, as presented in 
#ELECTRICITY GENERATION TARIFFS: RENEWABLES (VAT EXCLUDED, EFFECTIVE FROM FEBRUARY 1, 2017)
Except for small HPPs, all other renewables had a VAT-inclusive generation tariff (51.29 AMD/kWh) 
set higher than the highest tariff for consumers (44.98 AMD/kWh with VAT; Table 1.7).
Small HPPs Built on drinking water pipeline, 10.579 (2.192) AMD (US cents)/kWh;
Small HPPs Built on irrigation system, 15.867 (3.287) AMD (US cents)/kWh;
Small HPPs Built on natural water flow, 23.805 (4.932) AMD (US cents)/kWh;
Wind Power Plants 42.739 (8.854) AMD (US cents)/kWh;
Power Generated from Biomass 42.739 (8.854) AMD (US cents)/kWh;
Solar PV Generation 42.739 (8.854) AMD (US cents)/kWh;
Source: Public Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC);
#1.5.3 NATURAL GAS TARIFFS 
Starting from January 2017, the structure for natural gas consumers was as presented in Table 1.9. This 
includes some tariff differentiation, in particular for socially vulnerable (poor) households, agricultural 
greenhouse farms and distinguishing consumers utilizing more or less than 10,000 m3/month. 
#1.5.4 MARKET PRICES OF OTHER ENERGY CARRIERS 
Figure 1.8 presents the unregulated annual average consumer prices for gasoline and diesel for the period 2005 
- 2016. Comparing values shows that average prices in 2016 were lower than their long-term average values: 
For gasoline it was AMD 375 per liter, compared to the average over the period of AMD 398; for diesel it was 
346 AMD per liter, compared to the average over the period of AMD 370.
#1.6 ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
The TIMES model is well-suited to explore how developing scenarios on energy efficiency policy and adoption 
can play a role in Armenia’s economy, creating conditions for economic growth while improving energy 
security. By reducing the energy intensity of economic output, energy efficiency is a key element in realizing a 
safe, sustainable and affordable energy supply, while meeting increasing energy demand and improving quality of 
life. Under existing conditions of extreme import dependence for fossil fuels, energy that Armenia’s citizens, 
businesses, and infrastructure do not use is one of the cheapest, cleanest, and most secure energy resources. 
Government of Armenia policy is to promote energy efficiency in all economic sectors according to definitions 
formulated in the Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (2004), and as articulated in the 
National Program on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (2007), the Action Plan of 
Armenian Government for Implementation of National Program on Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy (2010), the President’s Order on Approval of Armenian Energy Security 
Concept (2013), the Energy Security Action Plan for 2014-2020 (2014) and the Long-Term (up to 
2036) Development Pathways of the Armenian Energy Sector (2015). Further, on February 2, 2017, 
Government of Armenia (GOAM) approved the Energy Efficiency Action Plan for 2017-2018. 
In 2016 amendments to Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy were approved by Parliament 
which included some specific minimum energy efficiency requirements. The amended Law in particular 
requested the Government to classify economic sectors by their energy intensity levels as high, medium and 
low and established mandatory energy efficiency and energy management technical requirements for newlybuilt residential apartment buildings and state-funded construction or re-construction. 
The potential for energy efficiency in all sectors has been assessed repeatedly and remains high, despite 
the relatively low energy intensity of the economy. Although the GOAM has adopted laws and policies to 
promote efficiency through various programs as noted, the potential for efficiency improvement remains largely 
untapped. As energy prices rise, the urgency of accelerating uptake of energy efficiency throughout Armenia’s 
economy has increased. 
Nevertheless, up to 2016 obligatory measures to increase energy efficiency and/or to reduce energy 
consumption levels had not been implemented, so that it was possible to model for the base year only the 
“Autonomous efficiency improvement” (AEI) factors, which have been introduced as follows: 
 for Transport – 0.75%/year, ;
 for Agriculture and Commercial – 0.0%, ;
 for Industry – 0.1%, and ;
 for Residential – 0.01%. ;
These factors show the percentage of efficiency improvement due to replacement of old equipment and 
devices by new ones of the same type, taking into consideration some reduction of efficiency of old equipment 
because of depreciation. The AEI factor is in force for the whole planning period. 
#2. THE INTEGRATED MARKAL - EFOM SYSTEM (TIMES) MODEL 
PLATFORM AND METHODOLOGY 
#2.1 THE GENERIC TIMES MODEL PLATFORM 
The TIMES model platform, a set of tools developed and maintained under the auspices of the IEA - ETSAP, is 
an economic model generator for local, national, multi-regional, or global energy systems, which provides a 
technology-rich basis for representing energy dynamics over a multi-period time horizon. The model is usually 
applied to the analysis of the entire energy sector, but it may also be applied to study single sectors, such as 
electricity and district heating. The TIMES platform provides an integrated energy systems’ modelling 
framework that is designed to guide policy formulation over a wide range of energy, economic and 
environmental planning and policy issues and to help establish investment priorities within a comprehensive 
framework. 
Key aspects of TIMES platform include that it: i) encompasses an entire energy system from resource 
extraction through to end-use demands, as represented by a Reference Energy System network that connects
all technologies to track to flow of commodities throughout the energy system, see Figure 2.1; ii) employs 
least-cost optimization to identify the most cost-effective pattern of resource use and technology deployment 
over time; iii) provides a framework for evaluation of medium- to long-term policies and programs that can 
impact the evolution of the energy system; and iv) quantifies the costs and technology choices that result from 
imposition of the policies and program. Utilizing the TIMES model can be a productive tool for fostering 
stakeholder buy-in and consensus building.
In adapting the generic TIMES model to a specific country use case, estimates of end-use energy service 
demands (e.g., car road travel; residential lighting; steam heat requirements in the paper industry; etc.) are 
provided by the user to drive the reference scenario. In addition, the user provides estimates of the existing 
stocks of energy-related equipment in all sectors and identifies assumptions relating to the characteristics of 
available future technologies and present and future sources of primary energy supply and their potentials. 
Using these as inputs, the TIMES model carries out its optimization to supply energy services at minimum 
global cost by simultaneously making decisions on equipment investment and operation; primary energy supply; 
and energy trade. For example, if there is an increase in residential lighting energy service relative to the 
reference scenario (perhaps due to a decline in the cost of residential lighting, or due to different assumptions 
on GDP growth), either existing generation equipment must be used more intensively, or new, possibly more 
efficient equipment must be installed. The choice by the model of the generation equipment (type and fuel) is 
based on the analysis of the characteristics of alternative generation technologies, on the economics of energy 
supply, and on environmental criteria. As shown in Figure 2.2, the TIMES model platform is a vertically 
integrated model of the entire extended energy system.
Finally, it should be noted that in TIMES, as in its MARKAL model forerunner, the quantities and prices of the 
various commodities are assumed to be in equilibrium, i.e. prices and quantities in each time period are such 
that suppliers produce exactly the quantities demanded by consumers. Thus, this equilibrium has the property 
that total economic surplus is maximized. 
#2.2 DRIVING THE TIMES MODEL VIA SCENARIOS 
The TIMES model is particularly suited to explore possible energy futures based on contrasted scenarios. Given 
the long time-horizons that are typically simulated with the model, the scenario approach is the most effective 
choice (whereas for shorter time periods econometric methods may provide more useful projections). A 
scenario consists of a set of coherent assumptions about the future trajectories of the main drivers of the 
energy system, leading to a coherent organization of the system under study. In the TIMES platform, a 
complete scenario consists of four types of inputs: energy service demand curves, primary resource supply 
curves, a policy setting, and descriptions of a complete set of existing and available future technologies. 
#2.2.1 THE DEMAND COMPONENT OF A TIMES SCENARIO 
In the case of a country-specific version of the TIMES model, the main drivers are: Population, GDP, GDP per 
bf hhldd l OhdfTIMES dl dd d demands over the relevant planning time horizon. This is done by choosing and applying elasticities of demand 
to their respective drivers. As noted earlier, the demands are user-provided for the reference scenario only. 
When the model is run for alternate scenarios (e.g., an emission constrained case, or a set of alternate 
technological assumptions), it is likely that the demands will be affected. The TIMES model has the capability of 
estimating the response of demands to the changing conditions of an alternate scenario. To do this, the model 
requires an additional set of inputs for the assumed own-price elasticities of the demand. In this case, the 
TIMES model is then able to adjust the demands endogenously to the alternate cases without exogenous 
intervention; that is, the TIMES model is driven not by demands but by demand curves. 
#2.2.2 THE SUPPLY COMPONENT OF A TIMES SCENARIO 
The second constituent of a TIMES model scenario is a set of supply curves for primary energy and material 
resources. Multi-stepped supply curves are easily modeled in TIMES, each step representing a certain potential 
of the resource available at a particular cost. In some cases, the potential may be expressed as a cumulative 
potential over the model horizon (e.g. reserves of gas, crude oil, etc.), as a cumulative potential over the 
resource base (e.g. available areas for wind converters differentiated by velocities, available farmland for biocrops, roof areas for PV installations) and in others as an annual potential (e.g. maximum extraction rates, or 
for renewable resources the available wind, biomass, or hydro potentials). Note that the supply component 
also includes the identification of trading possibilities, where the amounts and prices of the traded commodities 
are determined either endogenously or within user-imposed limits. 
#2.2.3 THE POLICY COMPONENT OF A TIMES SCENARIO 
Insofar as some policies impact the energy system, they become an integral part of scenario definition. For 
instance, a reference scenario may ignore emissions of various pollutants, while alternate policy scenarios may 
enforce emission restrictions, or emission taxes, etc. The detailed technological nature of the TIMES model 
allows for simulation of a wide variety of both micro measures (e.g. technology portfolios, or targeted subsidies 
to groups of technologies) and broader policy targets (such as a general carbon tax or permit trading system 
on air contaminants). A simpler example might be a nuclear policy that limits or expands the future capacity of 
nuclear plants. Another example might be the imposition of fuel taxes, or of targeted capital subsidies, etc. 
#2.2.4 THE TECHNO-ECONOMIC COMPONENT OF A TIMES SCENARIO 
The fourth constituent of a TIMES model scenario is the set of technical and economic parameters assumed for 
the transformation of primary resources into energy services. In the TIMES model, these techno-economic 
parameters are described in the form of technologies (or processes) that transform some commodities into 
others (fuels, materials, energy services, emissions). In the TIMES model, some technologies may be user 
imposed, while others may simply be available for the model to choose from. The quality of a TIMES model 
rests on a rich, well-developed set of technologies, both current and future, for the model to choose from. 
This emphasis on the technological database is one of the main distinguishing factors of the class of bottom-up 
models to which TIMES belongs. Other classes of models will tend to emphasize other aspects of the system 
(e.g. interactions with the rest of the economy) and may treat the technical system in a more succinct manner, 
e.g., via aggregate production functions. 
#2.3 THE TIMES-ARMENIA MODEL PLATFORM 
Following the generic process described above, as described in the following Chapter the TIMES-Armenia 
model incorporates the key inputs as presented in the following lists with Times-Armenia Key Inputs:
#Energy Balance 
Most recent overall energy balance, showing for each fuel: ;
‐ Supply by source ;
‐ Use of electricity/heat and distribution losses ;
‐ Use of different energy carriers in demand devices ;
‐ Consumption by sector;
#Resources
 Annual production maximum and associated price ;
 Total proven reserves;
#Technologies 
 Existing stock of power plants and devices;
 Fuels in/out, efficiency, availability in each milestone year, 
technical life duration;
#Demand Services 
 Level of energy service to be met in each period;
 Simplified electricity load duration curve and seasonal gas use ;
 Amount of fuel switching permitted over time;
#Global
 Length of each season/time of day;
 Discount rate, electricity reserve margin;
These inputs are then combined with defined policy scenarios as depicted in Figure 2.3 and lead to the key 
results as presented in the follwing lists: 
#Total Energy & System Cost
Total discounted cost of all fuel purchases, power plant builds, device purchases, 
operating & maintenance costs over the entire planning horizon;
#Resources
Annual production level, and marginal price if constrained and limit is reached;
#Technologies 
 Total installed capacity in each period;
 Annual new power plant builds and expenditure ;
 Annual fixed and variable operating and fuel costs ;
 Annual & season/time of day (for power plants) utilization ;
 Marginal cost, if constrained and limit is reached;
#Energy Carriers
 Annual amount consumed by each technology & by sector ;
 Marginal price (by season/time of day for electricity);
#Demand Services
 Marginal price of meeting each demand;
 Change in level of demand (if elastic formulation used) ;
#Emissions
 Emission level by resource/sector & fuel for each period ;
 Marginal costs, if limited;
#3. THE TIMES-ARMENIA MODEL AND ITS BASELINE-REFERENCE SCENARIO
#3.1 SCENARIO MODELLING 
Having described the structure of the TIMES-Armenia model in the previous section, the model was then 
calibrated for the base year (2016), the first modelling year. The task of then assembling a view of the future 
Baseline Reference Scenario was undertaken starting with the preparation of the future demand projection, 
future fuel prices, the power sector presently, and the suite of demand-side options as discussed in the 
following sections. 
#3.1.1 KEY ASSUMPTIONS FOR DEMAND DRIVERS 
The key assumptions regarding the main drivers used to project future demand for energy services, income (as 
reflected by GDP) and population levels and growth rates, are shown in Table 3.1, below. 
Given the predominance of gas in Armenia’s energy balance, it is further assumed that the natural gas price in 
Armenia will reach the European level by 2027 (IEA projection: Section 4.3 of World Energy Outlook 2018, 
International Energy Agency) and then follow it, as presented in Figure 3.1 (Blue line). The same trend is 
assumed for the gas price at power plant input points (Figure 3.1, Orange line). 
Prices for oil products and coal are forecast in accordance with European trends (IEA World Energy Outlook
2018), with a starting point from the real Armenian prices for 2016, corrected to 2018. It is assumed that the 
price of main oil products will increase around 123% by 2036, to reach the following levels: LPG, US$ 0.43/l; 
gasoline, US$ 0.987/l; diesel, US$ 1.049/; kerosene, US$ 1.437/l, aviation gasoline, US$ 1.261/l; and jet fuel, US$ 
1.163/l. Nuclear fuel prices for modelled nuclear power plants are taken the same based on the special study 
results provided by the Ukrainian National Nuclear Electricity Generation Company Energoatom9. 
Finally, accounting for the current electricity-for-natural gas swap contract is a critical assumption. The swap 
contract calls for imports of gas from the South at no direct cost, but in exchange for electricity exports at a 
rate of 1 m3 of gas = 3 kWh of electricity. It is assumed that both the swap contract and net imports from 
Georgia are held constant at their 2018 levels through the end of the planning period (2036); i.e., net exports 
to South will amount to 1.52 TWh per annum, and net imports from Georgia will be 74.5 GWh p.a. 
#3.2.1 DEMAND PROJECTIONS FOR USEFUL ENERGY 
Demand projections in the TIMES model are developed for useful energy services; e.g., lighting, cooling, 
heating, food preparation, transportation of people and goods, etc.10 The fundamental TIMES model 
requirement is to meet projected levels of useful energy demand in all sectors and sub-sectors, choosing those 
fuels and technologies that do so at minimum costs for the total system. 
Useful energy demand is related to GDP or demographic parameters via elasticities. These elasticities 
represent how much useful energy growth depends on the growth in GDP, or in GDP per capita. Elasticities 
vary for different sectors and end-use applications and they have been analyzed from historical data available in 
the Yearbooks of the Statistical Committee of the Republic of Armenia and estimated using expert judgment. 
As the economy grows, the overall demand for energy will increase. Based on analyses of available 
retrospective statistical data and assumptions of the working team, end-use energy forecasts by sector were 
prepared. The structure of projected useful energy demand and its growth for 2018 – 2036 is shown in Table 
3.2 and illustrated in Figure 3.2. 
The Residential sector accounts for the biggest share of useful energy demand in overall energy up to 2036, 
following by the Commercial sector, which in the last planning years is slightly less than the share of Residential 
(around 40% each). Agriculture accounts for less than 1% of useful energy demand, with Industry accounting 
for the remainder. It should be noted that all economic sectors increase in terms of their value of energy 
demand, with average annual growth rates ranging from 0.2% to 4.4%. 
The main demand drivers of demand growth for the Agriculture, Commercial, Industry and Freight transport 
sectors are GDP and sector elasticity to GDP growth. For the Residential and Passenger transportation 
sectors, the main drivers are GDP per capita and sector elasticity to GDP per capita growth. In addition, 
sector specific demand drivers were also applied, e.g., degree-days (for heating and cooling) in the Commercial 
sector, and Population and Changes in the number of new and existing houses for the Residential sector. The 
values of various elasticities have been established based on the general tends and expert opinion in working 
team decisions. 
In addition, the main sector-specific assumptions influencing projected growth of useful energy demand can be 
summarized as: 
 Agriculture: The small growth rate is expected due to low possibilities to expand agriculture. For this 
sector, the elasticity was taken as 0.2 for all demand types and for the entire planning period, as the 
result of low demand growth for electricity used for water pumping and tractors ;
 Commercial: It is assumed that development of the Commercial (Service) sector will be based on broad 
development of hotels, restaurants, shops, etc. This is expected to result in relatively high growth of 
demand for space cooling and heating, lighting, cooking, etc. For this sector, the elasticity has taken as 0.6 
for all demand types (space cooling, space heating, cocking, lighting, hot water and other appliances) and 
for the entire planning period. ;
 Industry: It is assumed that the demand growth will be mainly driven by the Food & Tobacco sub-sector 
and by development of the non-metallic minerals sub-sector. The elasticity for these sectors has been 
taken as 0.9 for the entire planning period. This assumption was made based on the analysis of available 
Armenian energy balances for recent years and on industry data as presented in the Yearbooks of the 
Armenian Statistical Committee. (https://www.armstat.am/en/?nid=586) ;
 Residential: Due to the projected slight decrease in population, the main demand driver, i.e., GDP per
capita, still grows. In terms of the TIMES modelling logic, this means that living conditions will improve, 
which allows the population the possibility to buy more appliances, in addition to existing ones. More 
space in homes and apartments will be heated (e.g., a country-specific issue today is heating of part of 
flats/homes). Also, the number of people per household is projected to reduce, which means that the 
number of apartments would increase and more energy will be needed for space heating and cooling, 
lighting, etc. The model also includes other drivers which will lead to reduced energy consumption, such 
as the demolition rate of old buildings and replacement with more energy efficient new buildings, and 
internal improvement of appliances’ efficiency, even when replacing the same one. All of these drivers are 
captured in the model and the results show that on net, consumption will increase. Two elasticities have 
been defined for Residential sector: That for space heating, space cooling, hot water preparation is 
assumed at 0.4; and that for cooking and other appliances at 0.2.; 
 Transport: It is assumed that the growth of the population’s standard of living, combined with 
Commercial sector development will require more differentiated types of passenger and freight vehicles, 
which will result in growth of Transportation end use energy demand. Sector elasticities for buses are 
distributed through the planning period, dropping from 1.3 in 2018 to 0.25 in 2036. For passenger 
carrying international aviation, the elasticity is kept constant at 0.51. For heavy-duty vehicles, cargo 
international aviation, and commercial trucks the elasticities will decrease from 1.1 to 0.95. For rail 
passenger transportation the sector elasticity is set at 0.64, and for freight rail transportation at 0.5.; 
#3.2 EXISTING ELECTRICITY GENERATION FACILITIES 
Table 3.3 describes the relevant and economic parameters for existing power plants included in the TIMESArmenia model.
For existing power plants, variable and fixed O&M costs are based on 2018 data for the tariff structure as 
provided by the Public Services Regulatory Commission (PSRC). For model purposes, fuel costs that are included 
in PSRC tariff calculations have been removed and variable cost recalculated in accordance with modeling 
requirements. 
Finally, it should again be noted that TIMES-Armenia model has been calibrated for 2018 using the available 
baseline year data for 2016. In the first quarter of 2019, the PSRC monthly data on electricity generation, 
electricity and natural gas transmission, export, import and sectoral distribution of consumption for 2018 
became available. Using these data, existing power plant characteristics were checked and adjusted to bring the 
calculation results in line with actual results. These also provide the corrected starting point for calculations 
over the full forecast period through 2036. 
#3.3 CANDIDATE ELECTRICITY GENERATION FACILITIES 
In addition to existing generation capacities that are and will be available in the system over the planning 
horizon to 2036, Tables 3.4 and 3.5 below describe the candidate technologies that are included in the TIMESArmenia model, including seasonal capacity factor for variable renewable energy sources (VRES). Detailed 
background on the data sources and assumptions are presented in Appendix 2. Investment costs in this table 
reflect the possible changes in costs for any given technology over time, so that a constant value means that no 
changes in costs are foreseen for the planning horizon. Discount and interest rates are considered in TIMES 
Armenia model and used during the calculations.
#3.4 KEY PARAMETERS FOR ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
One of the advantages of the TIMES modelling tool is its ability to simulate and optimize demand-side 
consumption. For the Initial Unconstrained Baseline (IU BASE) Scenario, no one activity is forced and the tool 
itself chooses the most economically attractive demand technologies to be implemented in the system. The 
model contains an extensive database with different types of demand technologies, presented as “Standard”, 
“Improved”, “Best” and “Advanced”. The main parameters describing each technology are cost, efficiency and 
the initial year within the planning horizon when such technology could be available, as well as fuel type used. 
Depending on the whole system cost calculated for each milestone period, as well as for entire planning 
horizon, and based on the costs for supplied energy carriers, the TIMES model chooses the least cost demand
option applicable for the current state. In the IU BASE scenario, the rate of penetration of
Improved/Better/Advanced devices is limited to 17.5% by the end of the planning horizon. 
Because the Government of Armenia has not yet put in place any obligatory requirements for implementation 
of energy efficiency activities, the market uptake of Improved, Better and Advanced technologies is constrained. 
The common assumption on the upper limit of “Improved” technologies for Agriculture, Commercial, Industry 
and Residential sectors is 10%. In addition, the Agriculture sector is allowed to change existing technologies by 
“Best” (10%) and “Advanced” (10%), the Commercial sector by “Advanced” (2.5%), and the Residential sector 
by “Best” (5%) and “Advanced” (2.5%). For the Industrial sector neither “Best” nor “Advanced” technologies 
are allowed, while for the Transport sector, implementation of all new technologies types are limited to 10%, 
based on the relatively limited retrospective data available for Armenia, combined with expert review and 
judgement of available experience by the DWG and SRIE team. 
#3.5 MAIN ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE INITIAL UNCONSTRAINED BASELINE SCENARIO 
Summarizing the key model assumptions as detailed in the sections above, we note in particular: 
 GDP growth is assumed constant after 2022, at the level of 4.5% per year (sensitivities to higher or lower 
rates will be examined in subsequent scenarios); 
 While population is assumed to have a small negative growth rate, thus slightly decreasing over the 
planning period, residential demand for useful energy still grows on average by 1.7% annually; 
 The commercial sector is the main contributor to demand for useful energy, with average annual growth 
of over 4.4%; 
 The agriculture and industrial sectors contribute less to the growth of demand for useful energy, with 
average annual growth rates of around 0.2% and 2.2%, respectively; 
 The gas price is assumed to increase, reaching the European prices level in 2027 (US$ 299/1000 m3) and 
growing at the same rate thereafter; 
 Electricity losses are assumed to maintain a total of 8.2% for transmission and distribution systems; 
 Net electricity exports to South are held constant at the 2018 level (1,515.2 GWh) for the planning 
horizon; net electricity imports from Georgia and from Artsakhenergo are assumed to remain unchanged 
at their 2018 levels, 74.5 GWh and 17.2 GWh respectively, for the planning horizon; 
 Both the Yerevan CCGT2 (RENCO) thermal plant and the Masrik-1 grid connected solar PV plant, which 
are already financed and have set Commercial Operation Dates are introduced in the system at those 
dates; and 
 No other technical limitations are imposed on the introduction of new power generation candidate 
technologies in the system for the planning horizon. ;
#3.6 SUMMARY RESULTS OF INITIAL UNCONSTRAINED BASELINE SCENARIO 
The following discussion summarizes the main findings of the TIMES-Armenia initial model Baseline Scenario 
calculation results, in which no further constraints than those noted above have been introduced. It is useful to 
reiterate that the purpose of this exercise is to provide a starting point and framework for further analysis, 
focused on the sole criterion of least cost entry of new generation in the system to ensure that projected 
demand is met. Based on the results of this scenario, further adjustments may be made before examining a 
series of practical scenarios and sensitivities that will be developed in order to provide inputs for policy and 
planning considerations for Armenia’s energy sector. 
Starting with the projection of main energy sources over the planning time horizon, presented in Table 3.6, we 
hl ibfhdiih ihiTl PiESl(TPES) staying at around 58% in the period following the exit from the system of the ANPP in 2027, having declined to
just under 50% in the period around 2024. Nuclear energy remains a significant supply source, accounting for 
up to 25% of TPES, until the ANPP exits from the system. Renewable energy sources increase dramatically 
over the planning period, rising from around 6% of TPES to 24%. The share of oil products in TPES rises slightly 
from 10% to 12 % over the planning period.
Given the continuing large role of gas in TPES, albeit balanced by the rise of renewable energy sources later in 
the planning period, we considered whether the capacities of existing gas pipelines might cause possible gas 
supply restrictions. The results, presented in Table 3.7, indicate that at the end of planning period, the gas 
supply level from Russia will be just under 55% of maximum capacity of pipeline.
The final energy consumption (FEC) by sectors and fuel types is presented in Table 3.8. As can be seen, the 
main energy source consumed for the Agriculture sector, which accounts for less than 2% of total FEC, is oil 
products, remaining around 77% throughout the planning period. For the Commercial sector, whose share of 
total FEC rises from 16% to over 20% over the planning period, the main sources of energy consumed are 
natural gas and electricity; the former covering 57% and the latter 42% of sectoral demand respectively, with a 
slight shift over the planning period from gas to electricity. In the Industry sector, whose share of total FEC 
rises very slightly from just under 15% to just over 16% over the planning period, the main sources of energy 
consumed are again natural gas and electricity; the former accounting for 50% and the latter 43% of sector 
demand respectively, here with a slight shift over the planning period from electricity to gas. The main sources 
of final energy consumption in the Residential sector are natural gas, electricity, and biofuels, accounting for 
around 63%, 19% and 18%, respectively, with very slight shifts over the planning period away from gas and biofuels and toward electricity. Finally, in the Transport sector, FEC is almost entirely split between natural gas 
and oil products, the former accounting for 59% and the latter 40%, respectively, with a slight decrease in the share of natural gas over the planning period given a small increase in electricity use in the sector. 
required to ensure safe and uninterrupted operation of all the technologies and installations not only in the
supply, transmission and distribution systems, but also for all consumer (demand) needs.
As can be seen in Figure 3.3, the largest share of total system cost for entire planning period is allocated for 
investments (45%), while the next largest portion (28%) is for fuel. Fixed costs and variable costs (excluding fuel) 
account for 14% and 13% of overall costs respectively. 
Finally, the least-cost configuration of the power sector as determined by the TIMES-Armenia model is 
presented in Table 3.9, showing the Initial Unconstrained Baseline Scenario for total installed capacity in each 
period, in MW. In addition to existing generation units, this scenario includes the introduction of the RENCO 
gas-fired CCGT and the Masrik-1 solar PV power plants according to their scheduled Commercial Operation 
Dates, and also forces the decommissioning of the ANPP and Hrazdan TPP at the end of their current 
operational lifetimes, 2027 and 2021, respectively. 
In this Least-Cost Baseline, with no other limitations on choice of technology, by the end of planning period the 
model results show an added capacity of 2,931 MW of grid-connected Solar PV, 1,091 MW of Wind Farms and 
107 MW of added Small HPPs. The quantity of electricity generation by each technology or plant (in GWh) 
over the planning period is presented in Table 3.10. 
These results show clearly that, taken from a cost perspective only and leaving aside any other possible 
technical constraints, extensive implementation of grid-connected solar PVs along with wind farms (Variable 
Renewable Energy Sources – VRES) are economically the most attractive sources of new electricity generation 
over the period to 2036. As a practical matter, planning for and realizing such extensive growth of VRES could 
clearly create operational challenges for the electricity system. As large amounts of new grid connected VRESs 
are introduced, the model shows a decline in production of Small HPPs, which are almost exclusively run-ofriver. This is driven in part by the fact of maximum solar generation during summer time (especially in June), 
when large amounts of hydro generation are also available, although the model limits generation by these Small 
HPPs at these times as higher cost. In the winter, when power system peak is in the evening and solar is not 
producing, the compensating generation cannot be from Small HPPs but is rather met by operation at full 
capacities of the RENCO and Yerevan CCGT plants. Given system operational constraints of having such large 
amounts of VRES on the system from solar PV, this could imply the need for implementation of storage 
technologies, although these are available and are not among the selected least-cost solutions. Another possible 
approach to overcome potential system stability problems would be to limit annual construction of gridconnected solar PV plants. In fact, we explore this in the next case, which describes our proposed Baseline - 
Reference Scenario.
Summarizing the Initial Unconstrained Baseline (IU BASE) Scenario, Figures 3.4 and 3.5 show the pattern of
new generation added to the system by type and the associated total lumpsum projected investment 
expenditures over the planning period, which amounts to roughly US $3.17 billion to add around 4,409 MW of 
capacity. After decommissioning of the ANPP in 2027, the model indicates the power system should build 
around 1,091 MW of new power capacities to cover the gap of electricity production, which is added from 
wind farms as the lowest cost technology at that time with average annual capacity factor (0.31) suitable to 
cover about 340 W of the lost base load capacity and match system load needs. During the last three planning 
periods a further 1,283 MW of generation capacity is added to cover the growth of demand, which the model 
adds through the addition of Solar PV as the least cost alternative. 
#3.7 BASELINE-REFERENCE SCENARIO (BASE-R) WITH LIMITATION OF VRES 
Results of the Initial Unconstrained Baseline (IU BASE) Scenario clearly highlighted the cost-based preference 
for significant implementation of grid-connected wind and solar PV generation. At the same time, such a 
substantial expansion also raises questions of the required further analysis of system technical issues associated 
with adding very large amounts of VRES, e.g., system stability and dispatching issues, as well as of ensuring 
realistic time frames for development of those resources and the availability of domestic capacity to do so at 
such large scale. While these issues suggest that it could be reasonable to look at more limited expansion of 
VRES, there are also significant benefits for domestic energy security that would arise from displacing imported 
gas or nuclear fuels with VRES and which in turn would suggest that renewable generation expansion should be 
promoted as much as practically possible. To reflect these aspects of concern, the following scenario, which we 
develop as the Baseline-Reference Scenario (BASE-R), imposes a certain limitation on grid-connected solar PV 
and wind generation expansion. In particular, the following sections develop the BASE-R Scenario in which 
total VRES development is capped at 2,000 MW, of which grid-connected solar PV can be at maximum 1,500 
MW over the planning period and wind generation at 500 MW. Based on wide discussion with Armenian solar 
experts it was assumed that construction capacities would be limited to around 100 MW per annum, which 
would imply around 1,600 MW over the planning horizon 16 years. As a practical matter, based on current 
construction tendencies it was decided to impose the limit at 1,500 MW over the planning horizon. 
Once we have compared this BASE-R Scenario to the IU BASE Scenario presented in the previous section, in 
Chapter 4 we will then proceed to use the BASE-R Scenario as the point of comparison for examining further 
the alternate policy scenarios that have been identified by key sector stakeholders as of interest in looking to 
reshape the evolution of the Armenian energy system. 
#3.7.1 MAIN ASSUMPTIONS FOR THE BASELINE-REFERENCE (BASE-R) SCENARIO 
The BASE-R Scenario maintains the same assumptions regarding key demand drivers and hence the same 
projected growth of sectoral demands for useful energy as in the IU BASE Scenario (Section 3.5 above); it also 
retains the same assumptions related to gas prices, electricity losses, net exports, energy efficiency adoption 
rates and inclusion of Yerevan CCGT2 and Masrik-1. In addition, the BASE-R Scenario introduces the following 
assumptions related to limiting VRES deployment over the period from 2020-2036: 
 Introduction of new VRES generation capacity is limited to 1.5 GW for solar PV (central and 
decentralized) and 0.5 GW of wind. ;
 Annual maximum new capacity additions are capped at 100 MW for central solar PV, 4/5 MW for 
Residential/Commercial rooftop PV, and 50 MW for wind. ;
 No other technical limitations are imposed on the introduction of new power generation candidate 
technologies in the system for the planning horizon. ;
#3.7.2 SUMMARY OF BASE-R SCENARIO RESULTS 
Starting again with the projection of main energy sources over the planning time horizon, Table 3.11 shows 
that natural gas remains by far the dominant source, with its share in TPES at around 68% in the period 
following the exit from the system of the ANPP in 2027, having declined to 50% prior to that period. In fact, 
compared to the IU BASE Scenario, gas increases its share of TPES by about 10% after 2027 and its amount by 
around 25% as a result of limiting VRES builds. In the BASE-R Scenario, RES increases around two and a half 
times over the planning period, with its share rising from 6.6% of TPES to nearly 16% by 2030, as the new 
generation reaches its assumption-allowed limits. No other sources of primary energy supply show significant 
changes from the IU BASE scenario.
Given the continuing large and expanded role of gas in TPES with the limitation of RES implementation, we 
again considered whether capacities of existing gas pipelines might cause possible gas supply restrictions. The 
results indicate that by the end of planning period, the gas imports from Russia would increase to 2.58 billion 
m3 or just under 71% of maximum capacity of pipeline (see Table 3.7 above).
The FEC distributed by sectors and fuel types is presented in Table 3.12, which shows no significant changes
when compared to the FEC in the IU BASE Scenario (Table 3.8 above). 
Figure 3.6 presents the net present value of the sum of all costs, as projected by the model, that are associated 
with ensuring development and operation of Armenia’s energy system to meet the projected energy 
consumption over the period to 2036, as total of US $41.0 billion, which is higher than Base case without 
renewables limitation by US$ 512 M, an increase of 1.3%. As noted earlier in the discussion of Figure 3.3, these 
projected costs comprise all costs associated with supply of energy, generation of electricity and with the enduse demands for energy across all five sectors of the model, i.e., Agriculture, Commercial, Industry, Residential, 
and Transport. 
As shown in Table 3.13, which summarizes the levels and changes in total discounted system development 
costs between the IU BASE Scenario and the Baseline-Reference Scenario, in fact the 2% overall increase in 
costs associated with the imposed limitation on VRES generation expansion masks a 2.9% decrease in 
investment costs and a 10.4% increase in fuel costs, largely associated with the increased use of gas. 
Figure 3.6. Structure of Total Discounted System Cost to 2036 (US$ Million, %)
Finally, the least-cost configuration of the power sector as determined by the TIMES-Armenia model is 
presented in Table 3.14, showing for the BASE-R Scenario the total installed capacity in each period in MW. As 
noted earlier, in addition to existing generation units, this scenario includes the introduction of the RENCO 
gas-fired Yerevan CCGT2 and the Masrik-1 solar PV power plants according to their scheduled Commercial 
Operation Dates and also forces the decommissioning of the ANPP and Hrazdan TPP at the end of their 
current operational lifetimes, 2027 and 2021, respectively. In addition, the limitation of VRES to 1.5 GW of 
Solar PV and 0.5 GW of Wind farms is in force. 
In the BASE-R scenario, by the end of planning period the model results show an added capacity of grid
connected Solar PV and Wind Farms near their upper permissible levels, with 1,500 MW of all types of solar 
PV and 503 MW of wind, as well as 107 MW of new Small HPPs (against the existing 328 MW; see Table 3.3 
above), plus 75 MW of medium-size hydropower from the Shnokh HPP (from 2027) and finally at the end of 
the planning period of the 66 MW Loriberd HPP. Both of these last-named HPPs represent the next cheapest 
generation technologies following solar and wind. It is useful to note again that in finding the least-cost solution, 
the TIMES-Armenia model takes into consideration not only the associated costs, but also efficiencies and 
availability factors for these HPPs. 
The quantity of electricity generation by each technology or plant, in GWh, over the planning period is 
presented in Table 3.15. As the limited amounts of new VRES are introduced, the model shows relatively 
stable generation by most of the other power plants. Only generation at RENCO CCGT declines slightly 
between 2020 and 2024, while generation of Hrazdan 5 TPP is needed only in a relatively small amount at the 
end of planning period. 
Figures 3.7 and 3.8 show the pattern of new generation added to the system by type and the associated total 
lumpsum projected investment expenditures over the planning period, which amounts to roughly US $1.89 
billion for 2,457 MW of added capacity. In the period of decommissioning the ANPP in 2027, the model 
indicates the power system should add around 540 MW of new power capacity to cover the gap of electricity 
generation, which is added from the lowest cost technologies at that time - Solar PV (300 MW), wind farm 
(150 MW) and medium-sized Shnokh HPP (75 MW). During the last three planning periods to 2036, an 
additional 875 MW of generation capacity is added to cover the growth of demand; again, this comprises new 
VRES investment in Solar PV (714 MW), wind farms (95 MW) and the medium-sized Loriberd HPP (66 M).
#3.7.3 SELECTED COMPARISONS WITH INITIAL BASELINE SCENARIO 
In addition to the observations in the preceding section comparing TIMES-Armenia model projections for the 
IU BASE and BASE-R Scenarios, we highlight the following points:
As shown in Figure 3.9, the assumed limitation on implementing new generation from VRES reduces the
volume of renewables in TPES in 2036 by 36%, from 36 PJ to 25 PJ, while gas plays an increasingly large role in 
TPES after decommissioning of the ANPP in 2027, with an increased amount of between 20 – 23 PJ, on average 
increase over the period 2027-2036 of 27%.
As shown in Figure 3.10, the assumed limitation on implementing new generation from VRES reduces the
overall total (undiscounted) lumpsum level of investment in new generation by 40%, from US$3,170 million to 
US$ 1,891, which is the combined result of the much-reduced level of solar PV and wind investment, offset 
partly by the increased HPP investments and higher utilization of the existing gas-fired thermal generation. 
Thus, the reduced new generation investment funding need of US$ 1,279 million is also associated with 
significantly higher fuel expenditures. As the limited implementation of VRES results in additional natural gas 
demand of roughly 26.5% relative to IU BASE by 2036, this amounts to an additional total of approximately 
7.62 billion m3 of gas over the planning period, which would be the assumed gas prices require an additional 
(undiscounted) US$ 2.36 billion.
#4. SELECTED SCENARIOS FOR THE ARMENIAN ENERGY SYSTEM: 2020-2036 
This Chapter provides a summary of key results in comparing the Baseline-Reference (BASE-R) Scenario with a 
set of alternative scenarios identified as of interest by key sector stakeholders. Full detailed outputs for each 
Scenario are presented in Annex 4. 
#4.1 GDP GROWTH SENSITIVITY ANALYSES 
#4.1.1 SENSITIVITY ANALYSES DESCRIPTION 
The BASE-R scenario assumed that GDP growth will stay constant after 2022, at the level of 4.5% per year. 
Taking into consideration that GDP is the main driver of demand growth, two sensitivity scenarios have been 
modeled to analyze the influence of different GDP growth rates on the Armenian energy system’s least cost 
development pathway. In particular, the cases of a 50% higher growth rate (6.75% per year) and a 50% lower 
rate (2.25% per year) have been analyzed. Figure 4.1 below shows the modelled levels of GDP for each 
milestone year at the three growth rate levels.
#4.1.2 GDP GROWTH SENSITIVITY RESULTS 
As anticipated, Table 4.1 shows that total system costs are estimated to increase by around 12.2% in the case 
with a 50% higher GDP growth rate and to decrease by 7.0% in scenario with a 50% lower GDP growth rate as 
compared to the BASE-R scenario. With higher GDP growth reflecting broader development of the economy 
at large, this results in an increase of energy use to cover the enlarged demand. It is interesting to note that 
while the higher rate of GDP growth leads to an overall level of GDP nearly 47% higher than in the BASE-R 
scenario, energy system costs increases by a significantly lower percentage. Similarly, while the lower level of 
GDP growth leads to lower energy system total costs, the reduction of 7% is less than the overall decrease in 
GDP of 23% compared to BASE-R.
As shown in Table 4.2 below, in case with a 50% higher GDP growth rate, the overall increase in TPES is 6.3%, 
which is largely due to the additional use of imported natural gas as compared to BASE-R by around 138 PJ 
(roughly 4.0 billion m3), followed by oil products at around 52 PJ, and by RES reaching 7 PJ over the entire 
planning period. Again, as with total system costs, this increase in TPES is significantly lower than the overall
increase in GDP, indicating a reduced energy intensity of economic activity. In case of a 50% lower rate of GDP
growth, reduced demand results in less use of imported natural gas by 83 PJ (around 2.4 billion m3), of oil 
products by 29 PJ and of RES by nearly 3 PJ as compared to the BASE-R scenario, again with TPES declining in 
percentage terms by less than the overall decrease in GDP. Figure 4.2 below illustrates the changes in 
composition of TPES as compared to the BASE-R scenario for each of the GDP growth scenarios.
As shown in Table 4.3 below, the higher GDP growth rate results in an increase of FEC by 7.5%, slightly higher 
than in the growth of TPES. Referring to the more detailed outputs of the TIMES Armenia model, the data 
show that the higher income growth in fact creates possibilities to use more efficient and more expensive 
technologies on the demand side. This is also seen from Table 4.4, where the amount of money spent to 
purchase demand devices increases by almost 19% in comparison with BASE-R scenario. It is useful to note that 
the significant growth of FEC is driven by increased use of gas and oil products to meet increased demand in 
the Transport and Residential sectors. The reverse situation is shown in the lower GDP growth rate scenario, 
in which lower income growth results in a decrease both of FEC by 4.3% and purchases of demand devices by 
around 11%.
Table 4.5 presents the TIMES Armenia model results for electricity generation capacity by plant and plant type 
over the planning horizon for each of the GDP growth scenarios, as well as for the BASE-R scenario. The key 
notable point, which is the same in both GDP growth scenarios, is that the overall level of all power plant 
capacity additions remains the same, with some small variations in the timing of additions to the system.
Figures 4.3 and 4.4 below provide another representation of the TIMES Armenia model results above for new 
electricity generation capacity added over the planning horizon, which again reiterates the key point that there 
are no differences in total new power plant capacities by type needed to cover electricity demand between the 
two GDP growth scenarios as compared to the BASE-R scenario, with only the implementation schedule for 
new solar, wind and hydro being slightly different, depending on the required consumption level in each time 
period.
Figures 4.5 and 4.6 show the aggregate projected generation levels by plant type for each of the GDP growth 
scenarios and their difference from the BASE-R scenario over the planning horizon. For the case of a 50% 
higher GDP growth rate, this indicates an increase of roughly 1,879 GWh of total renewable electricity 
generation and 1,438 GWh of gas-fired production, as compared to the BASE-R scenario, while in the in the 
case of a 50% lower GDP growth rate these figures show reductions of 803 GWh in generation from 
renewables and of 982 GWh from gas-fired generation.
As noted earlier, in both of the GDP growth rate sensitivity cases the main changes in TPES and FEC are
associated with changing demand for natural gas and oil products in the transport and residential sectors. Thus, 
there are only slight differences in timing of power system installed capacities and in the structure of electricity 
generation related to the timing of implementation of different technologies as compared to the BASE-R 
scenario. As shown in Figure 4.7 and Table 4.6, this is reflected again in virtually no change in the total lumpsum 
investment in new generation required as compared to the BASE-R scenario.
Table 4.47 summarizes the comparative fuel costs for electricity generation in each of the GDP growth 
scenarios, as compared to the BASE-R scenario. Note that in case of a 50% higher GDP growth rate, the 
additional utilization of gas-fired thermal power plants results in an increase of expenditures on natural gas for 
electricity generation by $425 million, + 10.0% compared to BASE-R, while in the case of a 50% lower GDP 
growth rate this is reduced by $254 million or - 6.0% compared to the BASE-R scenario.
Finally, as shown in Table 4.8, the TIMES Armenia model results confirm that the level of fossil fuel 
consumption will tend to change GHG emissions in the system as compared to the BASE-R scenario, by a 
range from an increase of 7.9% in the case of higher GDP growth to a decrease of -4.7% in with the lower 
GDP rate.
The TIMES Armenia model analysis of the effects of higher and lower GDP growth rates, covering the range of 
+/- 50% over the period from 2022 to 2036, confirmed expected increases (and decreases) in energy supply, 
end use consumption and GHG emissions, with interesting impacts from the increased adoption of energy 
efficient demand devices in the case of rising incomes which lead to an overall pattern of decreasing energy 
intensity per unit of GDP as income rises (with conversely less impact when incomes fall). The key finding of 
this sensitivity analysis is that there are no differences in total new power plant capacities by type required to 
cover electricity demand between the two GDP growth scenarios as compared to the BASE-R scenario, with 
only the implementation schedule for new solar, wind and hydro being very slightly different depending on the 
required consumption level in each time period. Thus, there is virtually no impact as well on the investment 
requirement for new electricity generation capacity as compared to the BASE-R scenario. The only effect of 
higher income growth lies in the increased (decreased) utilization of existing installed capacity of both RES and 
gas-fired thermal power plants, with a concomitant increase (decrease) in expenditures on natural gas fuel. 
Given this key result, no further detailed sensitivity analyses of the impacts of higher and lower growth rates is 
reported for other scenarios. 
#4.2 NUCLEAR DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS 
#4.2.1 SCENARIOS DESCRIPTION 
Activities to extend the operational lifetime of the ANPP up to 2027 are already in place and the plant was 
included in the BASE-R Scenario to be decommissioned from that time. Given that the available nuclear 
technologies included in the TIMESArmenia model were not selected on the basis of least cost in the BASE-R
Scenario and that the GOAM as a matter of policy remains committed to maintain some nuclear power in the
countrys energy mix, the following alternatives for continued inclusion of nuclear generation in the Armenia 
system are examined: 
 a) Forced implementation of a new nuclear plant upon ANPP decommissioning, in particular: 
 Forced implementation of a new nuclear unit with installed capacity 300 MW (Small 
Modular Reactor - SMR); 
 Forced implementation of a new nuclear unit with installed capacity 600 MW. ;
 b) Further life extension of ANPP, in line with international experience and ensuring all required safety 
upgrades (e.g., in the U.S. extension of NPPs lifetime this could be as long as 80 years 
(https://www.iaea.org/newscenter/news/going-long-term-us-nuclear-power-plants-could-extend-operatinglife-to-80-years), in particular: 
 Operating life extension of the ANPP for an additional 5 years after 2027 - up to 2032, 
with $300 million of additional investment;
 Operating life extension of the ANPP for an additional 10 years after 2027 - up to 2037, 
with$600 million of additional investment. ;
Thus, four (4) Nuclear Scenarios have been developed starting from the BASE-R Scenario and for each of them 
one of the above forced options has been allowed. 
#4.2.2 NUCLEAR SCENARIO RESULTS 
As shown in Table 4.9, life extension of the ANPP to 2032 reduces total energy system cost19 by 0.8%, while 
extension to 2037 reduces it by 1.2%, principally through reduced use of imported natural gas and the fact that 
additional investment costs for new generation are reduced. Forcing the build of new nuclear plants increases 
overall energy system costs compared to BASE-R by from 1.9 – 2.0%, depending on the size of new reactor, 
where savings associated with reduced fuel costs are more than offset by the higher costs for the new nuclear 
units which are built.
Figure 4.8 above shows how the development of the various nuclear options from 2027 will replace other 
energy sources, primarily imported gas and to a lesser extent RES.20 The data in Table 4.10 below indicate that 
in all the nuclear scenarios there is an overall increase in TPES21. Because part of the calculation of TPES starts 
from electricity produced and works backward to fuel used, the fact that NPP efficiency is around 33% means 
that the forced production of additional nuclear power electricity generation as compared to BASE-R is 
replacing the gas used in CCGTs, which have an efficiency of around 56%. A further factor contributing to the 
increase in TPES in these scenarios is that some of the extra electricity replaces gas used directly in demand 
side devices that have efficiencies more than 60%.
As a final initial summary point, the comparisons in Table 4.11 below indicate that there is no significant change 
in overall final energy consumption for any of the nuclear option scenarios as compared to the BASE-R 
scenario.
Figure 4.9 presents the projected construction of new electricity generation capacity in MW by type over the 
period 2020 - 2036 for the BASE-R scenario and the four nuclear option scenarios, which are further 
summarized in terms of differences from BASE-R in Figure 4.10. After the addition of Yerevan CCGT-2 
(RENCO), no gas-fired units are added. In both scenarios with new nuclear generation and in the scenario of 
ANPP extension to 2037, construction of the medium-sized HPPs Loriberd and Shnokh is eliminated, while in 
the scenario of ANPP extension to 2032 they are retained, although their entry to the system is deferred to 
the last two periods of the planning horizon. Compared with the BASE-R scenario, all the nuclear option 
scenarios delay deployment of new solar PV generation capacity, although in all cases the full amount of 
constrained new solar capacity (1,500 MW) is added during the planning horizon to 2036. Similarly, all the 
nuclear option scenarios delay deployment of new wind capacity until later in the planning horizon, and in the 
case of the new-nuclear LWR 600 MW capacity scenario overall new wind generation capacity grows to less 
than its constrained limit (500 MW) by just over 100MW.
Table 4.12 summarizes the overall differences in new electricity generation capacity built over the TIMESArmenia model planning horizon for the four nuclear option scenarios as compared to the BASE-R scenario. In 
the scenario with a 5-year life extension for the ANPP, the total installed capacity of new power plants is the 
same as in BASE-R, with differences in the timing of the implementation schedule for new hydro, solar, and 
wind facilities. In the scenario with ANPP life extension up to the end of the planning period, overall new 
generation capacity is reduced by -5.7%, as noted earlier through the exclusion of new medium-sized hydro 
plants. In both scenarios that introduce new nuclear capacity after the decommissioning of ANPP, the 
additional capacity increases of 300 and 600 MW for the new nuclear units is offset by the elimination of 
medium-sized hydro (141 MW), while in the LWR 600 MW scenario there is a further reduction of new wind 
generation capacity (by 114 MW). 
Table 4.13 below presents projected installed electricity generation capacities by plant or plant type for each 
scenario. As noted earlier, the scenarios including nuclear generation lead to somewhat later introduction of 
wind, with slightly reduced level compared to constraint limits in the LWR 600 MW scenario, and these 
scenarios eliminate the addition of medium-sized HPPs, except in the case of ANPP extension only to 2032. 
Figure 4.11 shows the aggregate projected generation levels by plant type over the planning horizon, which for
the most part mirrors the installed capacity trends above, with the notable exception of gas-fired plants which 
show a marked difference by scenario.
In all nuclear option scenarios the level of gas-fired generation is reduced compared to the BASE-R scenario: by 
23% when ANPP is extended to 2032 (i.e., 958 million m3 less gas is used over the planning period); by 49% 
when ANPP is extended to 2037 (with 2,027 million m3 less gas used); by 35% for the new nuclear SMR 300 
MW option (with 1,511 million m3 less gas used); and by 63% for the new nuclear LWR 600 MW scenario 
(with 2,638 million m3 less gas used). While no gas-fired capacity is added in any scenario, it is striking that in 
the scenario when the 600 MW LWR is added to the system the model does not elect to run existing gas 
plants at all after 2027.
Table 4.14 summarizes the comparative gas fuel cost savings in each of the nuclear scenarios as compared to 
BASE-R. While these represent significant savings in imported fuel, they are in general offset by increased 
investment costs, in particular in the two scenarios with new-build nuclear generation.
Table 4.15 above presents the lumpsum (undiscounted) investment costs for additional generation capacity by 
plant type over the planning horizon, while Table 4.16 summarizes the differences in investment levels required, 
by scenario. Life extension of the ANPP to 2032 increases these investment requirements by 15%, while life 
extension to 2037 increases these costs by 12%, reflecting both the assumed additional $300 million and $600 
million of further investment beyond the current program of safety upgrades, respectively, for these extensions 
and the fact that the longer life extension eliminates the investment required for both the mid-sized HPPs, 
Shnokh and Loriberd. The options to build a new nuclear replacement for the ANPP increase system 
investment costs significantly compared to the BASE-R scenario, with the SMR 300 MW requiring just over 
twice as much investment (an added $2.2 billion) and the LWR 600 MW scenario requiring an additional $3.1 
billion.
Finally, the model results confirm that replacing gas fired generation by nuclear power will tend to reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the system as compared to the BASE-R scenario, by a range from 4.5% to 
12.2% as shown in Table 4.17.
#4.3 NATURAL GAS PRICE FROM RUSSIA LOWER THAN EUROPEAN 
#4.3.1 SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 
The BASE-R scenario assumed that the natural gas price will increase up to projected European levels by 2027 
and after that continue to match European levels. Historically Armenia has negotiated gas prices with Russia 
below these European rates. In this section, the following two scenario versions are presented for trends of 
natural gas prices lower than European as compared to the BASE-R scenario, in all cases starting from the same 
initial border gas price effective from January 1, 2019, of US$ 165 per 1000 m3: 
• EU trend rate to 2036: Rather than imposing the higher initial growth of gas prices required to 
reach the European level in 2027, this scenario simply applies the EU trend growth rate over the entire 
period to 2036. ;
• Growth to $180 by 2027: In this scenario, the border gas prices is assumed to grow to US$ 180 per 
1000 m3 by 2027, and then to remain fixed at that level until the end of the planning period. (note: 
2027 is the indicative year as this is the timing for currently- planned shutdown of the ANPP).; 
It should be noted that in all scenarios it is assumed that the current gas transmission/distribution/supply 
margin does not change. Figure 4.12 below shows the modelled natural gas border prices for each milestone 
year.
#4.3.2 LOWER GAS PRICE TREND SCENARIO RESULTS 
As shown in Table 4.18, the total system cost is estimated to decrease by around 3.8% in the EU trend to 2036 
scenario and by around 5.6% in scenario with gas price capped at US$ 180 per 1000 m3 after 2027 compared 
to the BASE-R scenario. Given the fact that gas plays such a predominant role in the Armenian energy balance, 
scenarios in which gas prices are significantly lower than European gas prices over the planning horizon would 
be expected to increase the use of gas as compared to other sources of energy, but any such increase in total 
system costs is clearly offset by the assumed lower prices of that gas.
As shown in Table 4.19 below, in both scenarios there is an overall increase in TPES, because of increased use 
of the cheaper imported natural gas and reduction in implementation of renewable energy sources. In the EU 
trend to 2036 scenario, replacement of renewables by natural gas results in total additional use of around 32 
PJ23 of primary energy supply distributed primarily between an increase of 56 PJ (roughly 1.6 billion m3) of
natural gas and a reduction of renewables by 22 PJ over the entire planning period. In the scenario with the gas
price capped at $180, there is a 1.5 % increase of TPES, amounting to roughly 49 PJ of additional energy use, in 
which an additional 85 PJ (roughly 2.4 billion m3) of gas is offset by a 34 PJ reduction of renewables. Figure 4.13 
below illustrates the changes in composition of TPES as compared to the BASE-R scenario for each of the 
lower gas price scenarios, indicating the pattern of increase in natural gas supply and reductions of renewables 
and of oil products, equal to 2.2 PJ for a 1.0% reduction.
As shown in Table 4.20 below, despite the above-noted changes in the structure of TPES there is virtually no 
change in FEC. Referring to the more detailed outputs of the TIMES Armenia model, the data show that FEC 
remains virtually unchanged by fuel and by sector, which is the result of replacing electricity generated by 
renewable energy sources by that produced in gas-fired power plants. 
Table 4.21 presents the TIMES Armenia model results for electricity generation capacity by plant and plant type 
over the planning horizon for each of the lower gas price scenarios, as well as for the BASE-R scenario. The 
key notable points in both lower gas price scenarios are that no new gas-fired power plant capacity is needed, 
while the mid-sized HPPS are not required and the overall level of solar and wind capacity additions remain the 
same, with some small variations in their timing.
Figures 4.14 and 4.15 below provide another representation of the TIMES Armenia model results for new 
electricity generation capacity over the planning horizon, which again reiterates that there are no differences in 
total new power plant capacities by type needed to cover electricity demand between the two lower gas price 
scenarios as compared to the BASE-R scenario, and only the implementation schedule for renewable energy 
(wind) is slightly different, depending on the required consumption level in each time period.
Figures 4.16 and 4.17 show the aggregate projected generation levels by plant type for each of the lower gas 
price scenarios and their difference from the BASE-R scenario over the planning horizon, respectively. For the 
EU trend to 2036 scenario, this indicates replacement of roughly 6,186 GWh of total renewable electricity 
generation by 5,833 GWh of gas-fired production, as compared to the BASE-R scenario, while in the scenario 
with gas price capped at $180, generation from VRES is reduced by 9,460 GWh and gas-fired generation is 
increased by 9,401 GWh.
As noted earlier, in both of the low gas price scenarios the mid-sized HPPs are not built while the expanded
supply of electricity from gas-fired thermal generation does not require any new capacity. As shown in Figure 
4.18 and Table 4.22, this results in roughly 20% reduction in the lumpsum investment required, a saving of $377 
million in the EU trend to 2036 scenario and of $391 million in the scenario with gas price capped at $180, as 
compared to BASE-R.
Table 4.23 summarizes the comparative fuel cost savings for electricity generation in each of the low gas price 
scenarios, as compared to the BASE-R scenario. Notwithstanding the substantial increase in the total volume of 
imported gas, the lower prices still result in a significant cost reduction in both scenarios, with the total cost 
savings in imported fuel amounting to $948 million in the EU trend scenario and increasing to $1,418 million in 
the scenario with the gas process capped at $ 180 per 1000 m3.
Finally, the TIMES Armenia model results confirm that reduced use of renewable energy replaced by fossil fuels 
will tend to increase GHG emissions in the system as compared to the BASE-R scenario, by a range from 2.2% 
to 3.5%, as shown in Table 4.24. 
#4.4 REPLACEMENT OF GAS TO ELECTRICITY 
#4.4.1 SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 
The analysis of final energy consumption by energy carriers and sectors showed that the most consumed fuel 
source in Armenia is and will continue to be imported natural gas, virtually all of which is used for residential 
heating and transport. Since increased electricity generation based on the development of renewable energy 
resources is indicated as a least cost solution in the BASE-R scenario, expanding the use of these domestic 
energy resources could be accompanied by implementation of policies to stimulate use of electricity in the 
transport and in residential sectors to replace natural gas imports. To explore these opportunities, we examine 
the following scenarios: 
• Increase in the penetration level for the use of electricity in residential heating to 25% in 2027 and to 50% 
by 2036; 
• Increase in the penetration level for use of electric vehicles to 25% in 2027 and to 50% by 2036; 
• Both of these scenarios combined. ;
#4.4.2 REPLACEMENT OF GAS TO ELECTRICITY SCENARIOS RESULTS 
As shown in Table 4.25 the total system cost will decrease by around 1.2% in the scenario with forced 
penetration of electricity use for residential heating and by around 1.8% in case when 50% of the transport 
stock comprises electric cars by the end of planning period. In the combined scenario, the total system cost difference from BASE-R is practically the same as the sum of the differences of individual scenarios, amounting 
to a 3.0% reduction in total discounted system costs.
Table 4.26 shows that in all scenarios there is an overall decrease in TPES, primarily because of reduced use of 
imported natural gas and oil products. In the residential heating scenario, replacement of natural gas 
consumption by electricity results in savings of around 76 PJ of natural gas (roughly 2.2 billion m3) over the 
entire planning period. In the electric vehicle scenario, the TPES savings amount to 79 PJ which comes from a 
combination of reduce use of oil products (61 PJ) and gas (31 PJ), while at the same time there is an increase of 
around 12 PJ of renewable energy sources to cover the increased electricity demand. Finally, in the combined 
scenario the total savings in TPES compared to BASE-R amounts to 153 PJ, of which 105 PJ is from reduced use 
of gas and a little more than 60 PJ from oil products, which again there is an additional 12 PJ of renewable 
energy sources to balance the total energy demand.
Figure 4.19 below illustrates these changes in composition of TPES as compared to the BASE-R scenario for 
each of the scenarios replacing gas with electricity. In all scenarios we see a slight increase in renewables, as 
expected. Given that oil products are not used in residential heating, all of their reduction in TPES is found in 
the scenario with increased use of electric vehicles. In the scenario with residential heating increased to 50% 
from electricity by the end of the planning period, we see reduction of total natural gas supply (import) by 
around 4.8%, while the share of renewables in primary energy supply has practically not changed. In the 
scenario with 50% electric vehicles in the transport sector by 2036 we see a significant reduction of TPES from 
oil products by 24.8% and of natural gas by 1.9%, as well as around 3.4% increase of renewable energy sources. 
The indicators for the combined scenario are close to the aggregated data from these two scenarios, 
amounting to a 6.5% reduction of use of natural gas for the entire planning horizon and a 25.8% reduction of oil 
products, with an increase of renewable sources by around 3.3%.
Table 4.27 below shows that forcing higher levels of electricity use in residential heating and for transport 
results in reductions of FEC by 3.3% and 4.3% respectively compared to the BASE-R scenario. In the residential 
heating scenario, these changes primarily arise due to the more aggressive replacement of energy used by 
“Standard” demand technologies (490 PJ) by the more efficient “Advanced” (35 PJ), “Better” (68 PJ) and 
“Improved” (169 PJ) technologies. In the electric vehicle scenario, this reduction arises both from introducing 
electric transport technologies (27 PJ) and by replacing existing oil product-using technologies (58 PJ) by more 
advanced gas-using technologies (69 PJ). Finally, in the combined scenario there is an increase of electricity 
consumption by around 33 PJ in both the residential and transport sectors and a decrease of gas (152 PJ), oil 
products (58 PJ) and renewables (0.2 PJ).
As shown in Table 4.28 above, the TIMES Armenia model results for each of the scenarios to replace gas with 
electricity in the residential heating and transport sectors indicate that there is no need for additional new 
power generation capacity as compared to the BASE-R scenario. Figures 4.20 and 4.21 below further show that 
there are no differences between scenarios in total new power plant capacities by type needed to cover 
electricity demand and only that the implementation schedule is slightly different depending on the required 
consumption level in each time period.
Figure 4.22 shows the aggregate projected generation levels by plant type over the planning horizon, which are
very similar and indicate a roughly 10% higher level of total electricity generation in the scenario with electrified 
transport and the combined scenario, as compared to BASE-R. In particular, given that the structure of 
generation capacity remains the same, this is reflected in the increased use of the available gas-fired generation 
as more electricity is consumed after 2027. Here we see (in the “Gas-fired” line) that after 2027 there is 
increased use of the available CCGT generation as more electricity is consumed, which implies an increase in 
gas fuel for that which is offset by the decline in direct gas consumption for heat and transport.
Table 4.29 summarizes the comparative fuel cost savings for electricity generation in each of the scenarios 
involving replacement of gas to electricity, as compared to the BASE-R scenario. These significant savings in 
imported fuel as shown in Figure 4.19, which amounted to $240 million for replacement of gas in residential 
heating, a reduction of $95 million for the electrification of transport scenario, and around $320 million of 
reduced fuel expenditures in the combined scenario.
While as noted above there are no differences in the total amount of new generation capacity added to the
system in any of these scenarios as compared to BASE-R, at the same time there are very slight differences in
total lumpsum investments in new generations due to the shifts in timing of the costs realized, as shown in
Table 4.30 below. 
Finally, the TIMES Armenia model results confirm that reduced use of fossil fuels will tend to reduce GHG 
emissions in the system as compared to the BASE-R scenario, by a range from 3.3% to 7.7%, as shown in Table 
4.31.
#4.5 REDUCED GHG EMISSIONS FROM ENERGY SECTOR COMPARED TO BAU BY 2036 
#4.5.1 SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 
Armenia as a party to the Paris Agreement has undertaken obligations to reduce its GHG emissions to the 
level defined in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) but meeting these targets will be a challenge. 
This scenario examines the impact on energy system development costs of meeting Armenia’s adopted NDC 
obligations, which were not an imposed constraint in the BASE-R scenario. In particular, this scenario forces 
the NDC target of 127,000 ktons of CO2-equivalent emissions over the entire planning period, which is very 
close to a 10% GHG reduction as compared to BASE-R by 2036, the Cumulative GHG 127 Mt Scenario. 
We also examine a scenario where value of the 2036 GHG emissions target is shifted forward, to be achieved 
by 2030, the GHG Target by 2030 Scenario. This scenario allows us to assess policy options associated 
with additional reduction of GHG emissions, which would provide the possibility to transfer some amount of
Armenian GHG reduction limits to later years, or sell credits in the GHG market, or some combination of
both. 
#4.5.2 REDUCED GHG SCENARIO RESULTS 
It is obvious that limitation of GHG emissions can be achieved by reduction of fossil fuel use. Such a target 
could be reached by broad replacement of existing “dirty” technologies by non-fossil fuel ones on the demand 
side, and by wider implementation of renewable resources and nuclear options in electricity generation. The 
TIMES Armenia model results presented below summarize the possible pathways to meet Armenia’s NDC 
obligations, while ensuring the least-cost solution on energy system development over the entire planning 
horizon. Given that we continue to maintain the cap on level of deployment of renewables from the BASE-R 
scenario, it follows that further reductions in GHG from the generation side would be driven by the next noncarbon technology, i.e., nuclear. While increased efficiency can also arise on the demand side, but it this 
scenario we maintain the same energy efficiency adoption assumptions as in the BASE-R scenario. 
As shown in Table 4.32, the total system cost will increase by around 0.9% in case of limitation of GHG 
emission in line with NDC requirements, and by 4.0% in the scenario where this target is reached in 2030. As 
will be shown later, this is primarily due to reduction of natural gas use for electricity generation in power 
sector through its replacement by electricity produced by a new 600 MW nuclear unit (Figure 4.23). As Shown 
in Figure 4.23, while the Cumulative GHG 127 Mt scenario very closely resembles the earlier New Nuclear 
scenario with a 600 MW NPP added, there are differences in the implementation schedule, as the earlier 
forced nuclear scenario brought the plant into the system from 2027, while this GHG reduction brings it on 
line in 2033, which results in a small difference in total system cost due to discounting. In the GHG Target by 
2030 scenario there is also a different implementation schedule, with nuclear capacity added as compared to 
the earlier 300 MW (SMR) scenario. Figure 4.23 further shows how reaching the NDC target GHG emission 
limitation with nuclear and renewable replaces primarily imported natural gas.
The data in Table 4.33 below indicate that in both of the GHG reduction scenarios there is an overall increase 
in TPES. As was explained earlier in the description of the nuclear scenarios, the fact that NPP efficiency is 
around 33% means that the scenario-driven generation of additional nuclear electricity as compared to BASE-R 
is replacing the gas used in CCGTs, which have an efficiency of around 56%, contributes to this increase in 
TPES. Again, as the timing of implementation for new nuclear generation in these GHG reduction scenarios 
differs from the nuclear scenarios, there are slight differences in primary energy needs in each milestone 
period. A further factor influencing these results lies in the switching for demand devices to replace higher 
carbon emitting technologies with lower emission ones (e.g. oil products in the Transport sector being 
replaced by “cleaner” gas-using devices).
As a final initial summary point, the comparisons in Table 4.34 below indicate that there only a very slight 
reduction (well under 1%) in overall final energy consumption in both of the GHG target scenarios as 
compared to the BASE-R scenario. As noted above, the structure of energy carriers used on the demand side 
in these GHG emissions reduction scenarios differs from that in the nuclear scenarios, reflecting the 
requirement to reduce GHG by replacing higher-emissions devices with lower-emissions ones, while in the 
new nuclear scenarios the main driver of FEC is more electricity consumption from forced implementation of 
nuclear power.
Figure 4.24 presents the projected construction of new electricity generation capacity in MW by type over the 
period 2020 - 2036 for the BASE-R scenario and the two GHG target reduction scenarios, with Figure 4.25 
further summarizing these in differences from the BASE-R scenario. As in the forced nuclear scenarios, after 
the addition of Yerevan CCGT-2 (RENCO), no gas-fired units are added, and with both solar (1500 MW) and
wind (500 MW) reaching their imposed limits, in the Cumulative GHG 127 Mt scenario the low-carbon
electricity is added from a new 600 MW nuclear unit from 2033, which also eliminates construction of the 
medium-sized HPP Loriberd.
In the GHG Target by 2030 scenario the least-cost solution is achieved by construction of both Loriberd and 
Shnokh HPPs in 2030 to meet the requirements on additional GHG emission reduction at this milestone year, 
with nearly the full permissible limited amount of solar (1,448 MW) and 500 MW of wind farms, as well as two 
300 MW nuclear units, the first added in 2022 and the second in 2033. While the objective of this scenario is 
to examine how an earlier move to the NDC GHG limitation affects system outcomes, it is important to 
highlight that while having a new 300 MW SMR by 2022 is not feasible, both scenarios clearly indicate that 
introduction of new nuclear generation together with some demand-side management activities represents the 
least-cost solution to reduce GHG emissions 
Table 4.35 summarizes the total of new electricity power generation capacity installed over the planning 
horizon for both GHG reduction scenarios and compares them to the BASE-R scenario. There is a significant 
increase in new power plant capacities compared to the BASE-R scenario, with these additions arising from 
GHG emission “free” technologies, such as nuclear, hydro, solar and wind, which reduce the utilization of 
already-installed thermal power plants. 
Table 4.36 below presents projected installed electricity generation capacities by plant or plant type for each of 
the GHG reduction scenarios, as well as the BASE-R scenario. As noted earlier, these scenarios with inclusion 
of nuclear generation results in somewhat less solar capacity, while the more aggressive policy on emission 
reduction results in adding 600 MW of new nuclear, as well as both medium-sized HPPs. 
Figure 4.26 shows the aggregate projected generation levels by plant type over the planning horizon, which for 
the most part mirrors the installed capacity trends above, with the notable exception of gas-fired plants which 
show a marked difference by scenario.
In both of the GHG reduction scenarios the level of gas-fired generation is significantly lower compared to the 
BASE-R scenario: by 13% in the Cumulative GHG 127Mt scenario (i.e., 4,905 million m3 less gas is used over 
the planning period); and by 21.5% when the GHG reduction target is reached by 2030 (using 8,519 million m3
less gas). While no gas-fired capacity is added in any scenario, it is notable that in both of these GHG reduction 
scenarios the model does not elect to run existing gas plants at all after 2030. 
Table 4.37 summarizes the comparative fuel cost savings in each of the GHG scenarios as compared to BASER. While the replacement of thermal generation by nuclear and renewables does yield significant savings in 
imported fuel, it is useful to note how these figures compare to the increased investment costs.
Table 4.38 below presents the lumpsum (undiscounted) investment costs for additional generation capacity by 
plant type over the planning horizon, while Table 4.39 summarizes the differences in investment levels required, 
for each of the GHG reduction scenarios, as compared to the BASE-R scenario. In the Cumulative GHG 127 
Mt scenario, power sector investment increases by more than $3.472 billion, while achieving the 2036 GHG 
target by 2030 requires a further investment of $1.657 billion in comparison with NDC target scenario. 
Comparing these levels to the New Nuclear 600 MW scenariogeneration investment costs in the GHG
127Mt scenario increase by almost $1,960 million, which is associated with construction of the Loriberd and
Shnokh HPPs. In the more ambitious GHG target scenario costs are more than $2.0 billion higher compared to 
New Nuclear 600 MW. Finally, it is important to note that these increased levels of required investment are 
many times larger than the saving from reduced gas imports.
Finally, the model results confirm that replacing gas-fired generation by nuclear power will tend to reduce 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the system as compared to the BASE-R scenario, by a range from 7.3% to 
12.7% as shown in Table 4.40.
#4.6 FORCED IMPLEMENTATION OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY TARGETS 
#4.6.1 SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 
As noted earlier in Chapter 1, the Government of Armenia’s policy is to promote energy efficiency in all 
economic sectors according to definitions formulated in the Law on Energy Efficiency and Renewable 
Energy (2004; amended in 2016), and as articulated in a number of subsequent Government-approved 
Programs and Action Plans over the last 15 years. An approved National Energy Efficiency Action Plan
(2017) is currently in place and the second stage is approved by the Government and in force. Nevertheless, as 
no specific long-term energy efficiency targets have been articulated we proposed to consider scenarios for 
forced reduction of FEC at the levels of 25% and 50% over the planning horizon to 2036. 
When examining these proposed scenarios within the TIMES Armenia model, it was found that implementation 
of a 50% energy efficiency target was not feasible. In order to find the highest possible feasible level of energy 
efficiency targets, further sensitivity runs for 40% and 30% reductions were performed and these cases were 
not also found to be feasible. Thus, in this section we examine and present the results only for a targeted 25% 
improvement of energy efficiency. 
#4.6.2 ENERGY EFFICIENCY SCENARIO RESULTS 
This scenario has been modeled to force a 25% reduction in total of final energy consumption (FEC) across all 
demand sectors by 2036. Table 4.41 shows that as a result of primary energy savings the overall system cost 
will decrease by around 4.3%, savings roughly equal to US $1.8 billion. As will be detailed further below this 
arises mostly due to fuel costs savings, for although the new higher efficiency technologies which are forced in 
implementation may have higher investment costs, their reduced use of fuel leads to this overall total system 
cost reduction.
Table 4.42 shows that in reaching the target of 25% reduced FEC by 2036, TPES over the entire planning 
period is reduced by 10%, or 314 PJ, which arises principally from reduced demand for gas and oil products due 
to the increase in combined efficiency of demand devices used throughout the economy.
As illustrated in Figure 4.26 below, this reduction in TPES reflects key changes in the composition of energy
supply as compared to the BASE-R scenario, in particular through a significant reduction of natural gas use - 
cumulatively at 248.9 PJ for a 17.1% reduction, equivalent to 7,136.6 billion m3 - and of oil products, equal to 
66.2 PJ for a 27.7% reduction over the planning horizon. There is also 5.2% reduction of biofuel supply, which 
arises after 2030 and saves around 0.12 PJ in total. Beside the reduction of all fossil fuels, use of renewable 
energy sources in TPES grows by 2.2%, or 0.35 PJ, reflecting the attractiveness of these carbon-free 
technologies to achieve the FEC reduction targets.
Table 4.43 below shows that achieving a 25% reduction of FEC by 2036 will cumulatively save around 12.6% of 
consumed energy over the entire planning horizon, approximately 302 PJ. 
Figure 4.27 below shows that while the main energy carrier used remains natural gas, followed by electricity 
and oil products, most energy savings come from reduced consumption of natural gas, cumulatively amounting 
to around 240 PJ, around 79% of total savings, and from reduced consumption of oil products equal to 66 PJ,
around 22% of savings. Figure 4.28 illustrates how these savings in FEC are distributed among the end-use 
sectors, showing that the Transportation, Residential and Commercial sectors all offer significant energy saving 
potential, amounting to 125 PJ, 105PJ and 71 PJ, respectively.
As shown in Table 4.44, in order to cover the slight growth of electricity use in this scenario there is no need 
for additional new power generation capacity, as compared to the BASE-R scenario.
Figure 4.29 below illustrates that while there are no differences between 25% reduced FEC and BASE-R 
scenarios in terms of the total new power plant capacities by type needed to cover electricity demand, there is 
a slight variation in the implementation schedule depending on the required consumption levels in each time 
period. 
Figure 4.29. 25% reduced FEC Scenario: Construction of New Power Plants (by type), MW 
Figure 4.30 shows the aggregate projected generation levels by plant type over the planning horizon, which are 
almost the same in the 25% reduced FEC scenario compared to the BASE-R scenario, with an overall difference 
of less than 2.8% over the entire period to 2036. During the first half of the planning horizon - up to 2027- 
there is a reduction of electricity generation in gas-fired power plants by 1,050 GWh, with almost the same 
amount of additional generation provided by wind farms (1,092 GWh). In the period after 2027, the growth of 
electricity demand is fully covered by increased generation from gas-fired plants and by the earlier 
implementation of the Loriberd HPP, as compared to the BASE-R Scenario.
Table 4.45 summarizes the comparative total natural gas cost savings as a result of its reduced use in all sectors 
as compared to the BASE-R scenario. While the very small overall changes in power sector fuel expenditures 
for natural gas amounted to a $7.55 million reduction in comparison to the BASE-R scenario over the entire 
planning period, significant savings are recorded in total imported natural gas cost equal to $768 million as a 
result of more intensive implementation of energy efficiency technologies across the range of demand side uses.
While as noted above there are no differences in the total amount of new generation capacity added to the 
system in this scenario as compared to the BASE-R scenario, there is a very slight increase in total lumpsum 
investments in new generations due to the shifts in timing of the costs realized, as shown in Table 4.46.
Finally, the TIMES Armenia model results show that reduced use of fossil fuels arising from increased use of 
more efficient demand devices will tend to significantly reduce GHG emissions in the system as compared to 
the BASE-R scenario, by 14%, as shown in Table 4.47.
Table 4.48 presents data showing the sectors of the economy ranked by their level of reduction of GHG 
emissions. The most significant role in GHG reduction is played by the Transport sector, which contributes 
over half of the total, followed by the Residential sector at 30% and the Commercial sector at 19% of total 
reductions. Industry and Agriculture together contribute just 1 % to total GHG emissions reductions, while 
the Power sector slightly increases its GHG emissions - by 3% of the total - as a result of increases in 
electricity production from gas-fired power plants that are be required to cover the requirements of new 
demand side devices.
#5. SUMMARY CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
As noted earlier, the TIMES-Armenia model provides a platform for 
integrated energy system modelling that is designed to guide policy 
formulation over a wide range of energy, economic and environmental 
planning and policy issues, and thereby help to establish investment 
priorities within a comprehensive framework. Key aspects of the TIMES 
platform include that it: 
i) encompasses the entire energy system from resource extraction 
through to end-use demands (“well-to-wheels”); 
ii) employs least-cost optimization to identify the most cost-effective 
pattern of resource use and technology deployment over time; 
iii) provides a framework to evaluate medium- to long-term policies and 
programs that can impact the evolution of the energy system; and 
iv) quantifies the costs and technology choices that result from imposing 
those policies and program. 
Besides the strengths of the core modelling features of TIMES, the 
framework includes powerful model management tools to facilitate the 
effective use to inform decisionmakers. Thus, the TIMES platform is 
specifically a tool to develop and compare scenarios for future energy 
development and as such can be a productive tool to foster stakeholder buy-in and build consensus. 
The following sections highlight some of the key insights for energy sector policy development in Armenia over 
the period to 2036 that can be gleaned from the detailed scenario analyses presented above. To facilitate this 
discussion, we have gathered selected key modelling metrics and ratios in Tables 5.1 and 5.2. Detailed model 
results for each of the core scenarios can be found in Appendix 4.
The fact that the full amount of 
solar and wind capacity is 
selected by the model as part of 
the least cost solution for new 
generation under all scenarios 
underscores the importance to 
Armenia of ensuring a policy and 
institutional environment that 
supports full realization of new 
VRES generation to the 
maximum extent practicable, 
not only to ensure the lowest 
cost generation but also to 
minimize reliance on other 
imported energy sources and to 
strengthen Armenia’s energy 
security and competitiveness. 
#5.1 THE BASELINE REFERENCE (BASE-R) SCENARIO 
The TIMES-Armenia modelling exercise started by imposing no constraints on the technology choice for future 
energy sector development. A key result of this exercise was to identify expansion of variable renewable 
energy sources (VRES), in particular solar and wind energy, as the clear least-cost sources for new generation 
capacity, given the combination of Armenia’s rich solar resource and trends in declining cost of solar power 
over the planning period. As a result, the level of projected VRES capacity in the initially unconstrained variant 
of the baseline scenario was so high, adding nearly 3,000 MW of grid-connected solar and over 1,000 MW of 
wind power by 2036, it was clear that some more reasonable levels of constrained expansion of VRES 
generation would be needed, both to reflect potential limitations in institutional capacity to build so much new 
solar and wind in the coming decades and to ensure the planning and investment for any needed system 
strengthening that might be required to accommodate the higher shares of VRES in the total generation mix. 
Thus, through expert consultation with stakeholders it was agreed that a reasonable level of constrained 
maximum VRES capacity to be modelled would be set at 1,500 MW of solar and 500 MW of wind until the end 
of the planning horizon, along with limits on the annual build rates. This set of added assumptions was then 
applied to the baseline model and the results, described earlier and summarized in Tables 5.1 and 5.2 establish 
the Baseline Reference (BASE-R) Scenario.
In this scenario - as was ultimately seen in all other scenarios as well - the full amount of constrained solar and 
wind capacity is added, reflecting its significant role as a least-cost source of electricity for Armenia’s 
development. While some additional hydropower capacity is added in the BASE-R scenario to account for 
licenses already provided by PSRC, no other types of new generation are selected by the model (taking into 
account that the gas-fired Yerevan CCGT-2 TPP is already included from 2022) and recognizing that this 
scenario foresees closure of the ANPP from 2027 according to current planning. The total funding required 
for new power plant construction in this scenario is just under $1.9 billion, while projected imported natural 
gas fuel expenditures for electricity generation are $4.25 billion. 
Finally, in the BASE-R scenario total energy system costs27 account for roughly 11% of GDP over the planning 
period, while the energy intensity of GDP as measured by TPES is around 8.37 MJ/$. 
Taking into consideration that GDP growth is the main driver of energy demand growth, two sensitivity 
analyses were modelled to explore the influence of higher and lower GDP growth rates on the Armenian 
energy system’s least cost development pathway. In particular, the cases analysed were for a 50% higher
growth rate (6.75% per year from 2022) and a 50% lower rate (2.25% per year from 2022, as compared to the 
4.5% per annum GDP growth rate in the BASE-R scenario. 
While these higher (lower) growth rates have expected 
impacts in regard to increasing (decreasing) total system 
costs, TPES, FEC and electricity generation, it is especially 
interesting to note that the higher GDP growth rate also 
reduces the share of total system cost in GDP, owing to 
the fact that it is accompanied by significant lowering of the 
energy intensity of a unit of GDP, e.g., by 16% as measured 
by TPES. In fact, the high-growth case of BASE-R projects 
an even lower level of TPES per unit of GDP than the 
scenario which explicitly pursues reduced FEC through 
expanded energy efficiency (7.0 MJ/$ as compared to 7.5 
MJ/$). This enhanced efficiency is clearly seen in the fact 
that while overall GDP increases in total by 27% compared 
to the BASE-R scenario, total system costs increase only 
by 12% and TPES by 6.3%. This is also reflected in the fact 
that aggregate purchases of demand devices increase by 
almost 19%, which presumably embeds higher levels of 
efficiency over time as incomes rise. Conversely, the 
lower growth has mirroring adverse impacts on increasing 
total system costs as a share of GDP and increasing the 
energy intensity per unit of GDP.
A surprising but crucial result of these sensitivity 
analyses is that the model projects no 
differences in total new power plant capacities 
in level or by type required to cover electricity 
demand over the full range of GDP growth 
variation, with only slight variations in the 
implementation schedule for new solar, wind 
and hydro power depending on the required 
consumption level in each time period. Thus, 
there is virtually no impact as well on the 
investment requirement for new electricity 
generation capacity as compared to the BASER scenario. The only effect of higher (lower) 
income growth lies in the increased (decreased) 
utilization of existing installed capacity of both 
VRES and gas-fired thermal power plants, with 
a concomitant increase (decrease) in 
expenditures on natural gas fuel. Given this key 
result, no further detailed sensitivity analyses of 
the impacts of higher and lower growth rates 
was reported for any of the other scenarios. 
#5.2 NUCLEAR SCENARIOS 
Activities to extend the operational lifetime of the ANPP up to 2027 are already in place and the plant was 
included in the BASE-R Scenario to be decommissioned from that time. Although the available nuclear 
technologies included in the TIMES-Armenia model were not selected on the basis of least cost in the BASE-R 
Scenario, the GOAM remains committed to a policy to maintain some nuclear power in the country’s energy 
mix. To analyze the cost and other implications of these choices, four alternative scenarios for continued 
inclusion of nuclear generation in the Armenian power system were examined as: 
 Operating life extension of the ANPP for an additional 5 years after 2027 - up to 2032, with an 
additional $300 million of to ensure safety and reliability; 
 Operating life extension of the ANPP for an additional 10 years after 2027 - up to 2037, with an 
additional $600 million of investment to ensure safety and reliability; 
 Forced implementation of a new nuclear unit with installed capacity 300 MW (Small Modular Reactor - 
SMR);
 Forced implementation of a new nuclear unit with installed capacity 600 MW (Light Water Reactor - 
LWR). ;
A surprising but crucial result of these sensitivity 
analyses is that the model projects no 
differences in total new power plant capacities 
in level or by type required to cover electricity 
demand over the full range of GDP growth 
variation, with only slight variations in the 
implementation schedule for new solar, wind 
and hydro power depending on the required 
consumption level in each time period. Thus, 
there is virtually no impact as well on the 
investment requirement for new electricity 
generation capacity as compared to the BASER scenario. The only effect of higher (lower) 
income growth lies in the increased (decreased) 
utilization of existing installed capacity of both 
VRES and gas-fired thermal power plants, with 
a concomitant increase (decrease) in 
expenditures on natural gas fuel. Given this key 
result, no further detailed sensitivity analyses of 
the impacts of higher and lower growth rates 
was reported for any of the other scenarios. in BASE-R, decrease total system cost by around 1%, increase TPES by 3.7% and 7.3%, reduce GHG emissions 
significantly by 4.5% and 9.3% and decrease imports of natural gas for electricity generation by 11.8% and 
20.4%, respectively. A key feature of these scenarios is that they increase total investment costs for new 
power generation capacity 15.1% and 12.5%, compared the BASE-R scenario, with the higher investment costs 
for the longer extension being offset in its impact on total investment by the fact that in this scenario neither of 
the mid-sized HPPs (Shnokh and Loriberd) is built. 
The scenarios which propose new nuclear units to replace the ANPP from 2027 with either a 300 MW SMR or 
a 600 MW LWR increase total system cost by around 2%, increase TPES by 3.3% and 7.8%, reduce GHG 
emissions significantly by 7.1% and 12.2%, and decrease imports of natural gas for electricity generation by 7.2% 
and 15.5%, respectively. A key impact in these scenarios is that they significantly increase total investment 
costs for new power generation capacity compared the BASE-R scenario, more than doubling it to $4.1 billion 
(a 116% increase) for the 300 MW SMR unit and increasing it to over $5 billion (a 164% increase) for the 600 
MW LWR unit. 
Whether considering total system cost or investment costs required for new generation, the scenarios for life 
extension of the ANPP represent a least-cost policy choice for continuing to maintain nuclear capacity in 
Armenia’ energy mix. It should be emphasized that such life extensions must always first and foremost ensure 
all measures required for continued safe and reliable operation of these older plants. 
This is not surprising, given that in these scenarios, with the 
constrained amounts of solar and wind VRES fully utilized, the 
next choice for lower GHG-emissions generation leads to 
selection of the new nuclear technologies, in this case 
introduction of 600 MW of nuclear power. Given the slightly 
different implementation patterns for the introduction of nuclear 
units in these scenarios as compared to the forced 
implementation in 2027 examined earlier, the impact on total 
investment costs for new power generation capacity is even larger 
compared to the BASE-R scenario, ranging from $5.4 - $7.0 
billion.
As a final point, it is useful to note that the 
scenarios which imposed GHG emissions 
reduction targets to meet the level defined 
in Armenia’s NDC, either by 2036 or 
earlier, largely mirror the “new nuclear” 
scenarios in terms of increases in total 
system cost and TPES, reductions in GHG 
emissions and decreases in imports of 
natural gas for electricity generation. 
#5.3 DIFFERENT TRENDS IN IMPORTED GAS PRICES
The BASE-R scenario assumed that the natural gas price will increase up to projected European levels by 2027 
(the year of ANPP decommissioning) and after that continue to match European levels. Historically Armenia 
has negotiated gas prices with Russia below these rates, so two scenarios were analyzed with lower gas prices 
as28: 
• EU trend rate to 2036: Applies the EU trend growth rate over the entire period to 2036; 
• Growth to $180 by 2027: Assumes the border gas prices grows to US$ 180/1000 m3 by 2027 and 
remains fixed at that level until the end of the planning period. ; 
As expected, analysis of these scenarios shows that if Russia continues to provide relatively low-cost natural
gas to Armenia there will be a significant increase of natural gas consumption across all sectors, but mainly in 
electricity generation, transportation and residential heating. In both scenarios, the expanded use of existing 
gas-fired TPP capacity means that the mid-sized HPPs (Shnokh and Loriberd) are not built, while no additional 
thermal power capacity is required after the inclusion of Yerevan CCGT-2 (RENCO) and the closure of 
Hrazdan TPP. This results in a roughly 20% reduction in the lumpsum investment required for new generation 
in these scenarios, the lowest in any scenarios - although still with the constrained levels of solar and wind 
generation fully built - which generates an investment cost saving as compared to BASE-R of $377 million in the 
case with the EU trend to 2036 and of $391 million when the gas price is capped at $180. 
In both scenarios there is an overall increase in TPES, by 1 - 1.5%, because of 
increased use of the cheaper imported natural gas, which is accompanied by a 
reduction in use of VRES. In the case when gas prices follow the EU trend, 
replacement of renewables by natural gas results in total additional TPES of 
around 32 PJ, which is distributed between an increase of 56 PJ (roughly 1.6 
billion m3) of natural gas and a reduction of renewables use by 22 PJ over the 
planning period. When the gas price is capped at $180 from 2027, the 
increase of TPES is roughly 49 PJ, comprising an increase of 85 PJ of gas 
(roughly 2.4 billion m3), which is offset by a 34 PJ reduction of use of 
renewables.
While total energy system 
cost is reduced when gas 
prices are lower, it is 
important to note that the 
increased utilization of 
cheaper gas maintains and 
deepens Armenia’s 
dependence on imported 
energy.
#5.4 PROMOTING FUEL SWITCHING TO ELECTRICITY IN TRANSPORT AND RESIDENTIAL 
HEATING 
Analysis of FEC by energy carrier and sector showed that the most consumed fuel source in Armenia is and 
will continue to be imported natural gas, most of which is used for residential heating and transport. Since 
increased electricity generation based on development of Armenia’s VRES is indicated as a least cost solution in 
the BASE-R scenario, and confirmed in all other scenarios, expanding use of these domestic energy resources 
could be accompanied by implementation of policies to stimulate use of electricity in the transport and 
residential sectors to replace natural gas imports. To explore these opportunities, we examined the following 
scenarios: 
• Increase in the penetration level for the use of electricity in residential heating to 25% in 2027 and to 50% 
by 2036; 
• Increase in the penetration level for use of electric vehicles to 25% in 2027 and to 50% by 2036. ;
• Both of these scenarios together. ;
As shown in Table 5.1, each of these scenarios proposing increased sectoral electricity penetration separately 
reduces total system cost (in combination by 3%), reduces TPES (again, in combination by 5%), lowers GHG 
emissions (by nearly 8%, in combination) and decreases imports of natural gas for electricity generation (in 
combination by 7.6%). 
Most importantly, no change in the overall level and type 
of new generation is required by the model as compared 
to the BASE-R scenario to achieve these results, with only 
a negligible increase in the lumpsum investment costs for 
new generation capacity associated with slight variations in 
the implementation schedule for the projected additions of 
solar and wind power.
The reduction in natural gas used for electricity 
generation shows clearly that a policy to promote 
increased deployment of electric heating and vehicles 
will expand utilization of domestic VRES, reduce 
reliance on imported energy sources and strengthen 
Armenia’s energy security.
The reduction in natural gas used for electricity 
generation shows clearly that a policy to promote 
increased deployment of electric heating and vehicles 
will expand utilization of domestic VRES, reduce 
reliance on imported energy sources and strengthen
#References
Danish Energy Management A/S (2011) Demand-side Management Report. https://www.dem.dk/en/casesen/ ;
European Commission – Directorate-General for Energy (2016). Mapping and analyses of the current and 
future (2020 - 2030) heating/cooling fuel deployment (fossil/renewables): Work package 1: Final 
energy consumption for the year 2012. Contract N° ENER/C2/2014-641. 
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/mapping-hc-final_report_wp1.pdf;
International Energy Agency (2016). Armenian Energy Balance for 2016. 
https://www.iea.org/statistics/?country=ARMENIA&year=2016&category=Energy%20supply&indicator=TPESbyS
ource&mode=table&dataTable=BALANCES ;
International Energy Agency (2018). World Energy Balances, 2018 edition, Database documentation. 
http://wds.iea.org/wds/pdf/worldbal_documentation.pdf ;
International Energy Agency (2018). World Energy Outlook 2018. ;
International Energy Agency - Energy Technology Systems Analysis Program (2019). TIMES Model 
Overview. https://iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/model-generators/times;
International Monetary Fund Data (2018). 
(https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/NGDP_RPCH@WEO/ARM) ;
National Renewable Energy Laboratory/NREL (2016). Energy Storage: Possibilities for Expanding 
Electric Grid Flexibility. https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/64764.pdf;
Nuclear Energy Agency (2011). Current Status, Technical Feasibility and Economics of Small Nuclear Reactors.
OECD: Paris, France.;
Nuclear Energy Agency/IEA/OECD (2015). Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015. OECD Publishing, Paris, 
https://doi.org/10.1787/cost_electricity-2015-en.; 
Remme, Uwe. R. Loulou, G. Goldstein, A. Kanudia. A. Lettila (2016). Documentation for the TIMES 
Model. IEA-ETSAP. https://iea-etsap.org/index.php/etsap-tools/model-generators/times;
Republic of Armenia (2010). First National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) for the Republic 
of Armenia. http://www.inogate.org/documents/AM_1st_NEEAP_Armenia_final_2010.pdf;
Republic of Armenia (2016). Second National Energy Efficiency Action Plan (NEEAP) for the 
Republic of Armenia. https://www.energy-community.org/dam/jcr:0e568a32-bb62-4b90-b96afe41f3a0b9d3/EECG032016_ASE.pdf ;
United Nations Development Program/Global Environment Fund (2012). Lessons Learned Report 1 
“Armenia – Improving Energy Efficiency of Municipal Heating and Hot Water Supply”. 
http://nature-ic.am/en/publication/%E2%80%9CLESSONS-LEARNED-REPORT%E2%80%9D-OF-UNDP-GEF00035799-PROJECT--2012-/7300;
United Nations Development Program/Global Environment Fund (2016). The Republic of Armenia
TECHNOLOGY NEEDS ASSESSMENT FOR CLIMATE CHANGE MITIGATION, Reports I, II, 
III. http://nature-ic.am/en/publication/Technology-Needs-Assessment-for-Climate-Change-Mitigation/10574 ;
World Population Review Data (2018). http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries/armenia-population/);
#APPENDIX 1. THE COMPOSITION OF FEC IN THE BASE YEAR
In the base year, the total final energy consumption (FEC) amounted to 2,094.6 kilotons of oil equivalent (ktoe), 
out of which the households and Transport accounted for just over 1,400 ktoe. The base year data indicates 
the leading position of households, which accounted for 37% of total FEC, with Transport second at almost 
30%. In the base year, Services and Industry accounted for 15.6% and 15.3% of FEC, respectively, while 
Agriculture had the smallest share in the total Armenian FEC at 2%. In 2016, natural gas was the dominant 
type of fuel, amounting to 1,209.6 ktoe or 57.7% of total FEC. Figure A.1.1 shows FEC by sector and types of 
fuel in 2016. 
The Residential sector consumed 784.7 ktoe in 2016, making up to 37% of Armenian total FEC. Natural gas 
was the biggest form of energy consumed, representing 480.6 ktoe or 61.2% of total household energy 
consumption. In the base year coal and heat were the least used fuel types, each just 0.03%. The amount of 
different fuel types consumed in Residential sector are reflected in Figure A.1.2. 
Because natural gas and electricity were the main energy carriers used by households, their monthly 
consumption has been analyzed further in order to allocate the total amount of natural gas demand between 
heat, hot water, and cooking and for electricity demand between heat, hot water, cooking, air conditioning, and 
appliances. It was assumed that gas demand for hot water preparation and cooking remain unchanged 
throughout the year, while differences between winter and summer consumption patterns are reflected heating 
demands. The same analysis was done for electricity, where variations in monthly (and time of day) 
consumption patterns clearly showed for air conditioning and heating demand. The remaining demands - for 
hot water, cooking and appliances - are also kept constant throughout the year. This reconstruction was
required by TIMES in order to identify the shares of each demand for the Armenian model. Based on review of
the Economic Development and Research Center Analytic Report on Residential Energy Consumption Survey: 
2015 (EDRC, 2016), electricity consumption was redistributed among the different types of appliances defined 
in the TIMES-Armenia model, in particular: lighting, refrigerators and freezers, washing machines, vacuum 
cleaners, fans, mills, mixers, radio electronic equipment, and others.
In the base year, the Service sector consumed 326.9 ktoe, a 15.6% share in total FEC of Armenia. Natural 
gas was the main energy source consumed, providing 56.3% of the sector total and 8.8% in the total Armenian 
FEC. In 2016, electricity accounted for 140 ktoe of Service sector energy consumption, representing 42.8% of 
sector total and 6.7% of the total FEC of Armenia. Figure A.1.3 shows the structure of Service sector base year 
consumption.
For the Service sector, the same approach was used as described above for the Household sector in regard to 
allocation of the total demand between cooling, cooking, heating, lighting, miscellaneous, public lighting, 
refrigeration, and water heating. 
The TIMES-Armenia model splits the Industrial sector into the sub-sectors listed in the table below. 
Iron and steel;
Food beverages and tobacco ;
Chemical and petrochemical;
Paper, pulp and printing;
Non-ferrous metals;
Wood and wood products;
Non-metallic minerals;
Textiles and leather;
Transport equipment;
Construction;
Machinery;
Non-specified (Other Industry) ;
Mining and quarrying;
In 2016, Industrial sector FEC was 320.1 ktoe, a 15.3% share of Armenian FEC. Figure A.1.4 shows the base 
year consumption by fuel types and by each sub-sector of industry. The chart illustrates the leading positions of 
mining and quarrying, also food, beverages and tobacco sub-sectors in industry consumption, representing 27% 
and 26.9% respectively, whereas wood and wood products, also textiles and leather were recorded as smallest 
industrial consumption types of fuel, representing 0.3% and 0.4% respectively. As shown in the chart, natural 
gas and electricity hold the dominance in industry consumption, representing correspondingly 49.4% and 43.8% 
of the total consumption of the sector and 7.5% and 6.7% of Armenian total final energy consumption, whereas 
white spirit & SBP and liquefied petroleum gases came out to be the least consumed type of energy, 
representing 0.3% and 0.4% respectively.
The structure of fuel and electricity consumption in the Transport sector of Armenia differs radically from 
that of similar the countries in the region and those of Commonwealth of Independent States as a whole. 
These specific characteristics are largely based on the following factors: 
 Long-term transportation blockade of the country by Turkey and Azerbaijan limiting trading 
opportunities (export/import); 
 High prices for imported oil products; 
 Existing transport infrastructure (fully electrified railway transport, ground and underground urban 
electric transport, developed road network, etc.).; 
Thus, the availability and relative low cost of natural gas compared to liquid motor fuels led to a massive shift of 
the road transport to the use of natural gas. By the early 2000’s, up to 90% of the light vehicles and most of 
urban public transport are equipped with dual fuel systems using natural gas with gasoline as a backup fuel. As 
a result, an extensive network of gas charging stations has been established, covering almost the entire country 
and a drastic reduction of greenhouse gas emissions was recorded in the transport sector between 1998 and 
2018. 
The structure of fuel and electricity consumption in the Transport sector is based on the statistical data and 
expert estimates. During the base year, total energy consumption of this sector was 620.2 ktoe, representing
29.6% of the total FEC of Armenia, divided between: rail, metro, other electric transport; road transport;
aviation; non-specified (other transport). Figure A.1.5 shows the base year consumption of transportation subsectors by fuel types. The road sub-sector had by far the biggest share in this sector, representing 611.5 ktoe 
or 98.6% of total transport FEC and 29.2% of total Armenian FEC. Natural gas and oil were the main types of 
fuel consumed in transport and particularly in road sub-sector, representing 62.3% and 36.3% respectively.
The Agriculture sector has a small share in total FEC, with the use of energy in 2016 of 42.7 ktoe, 
representing 2% of Armenian total FEC. This includes electricity, diesel and kerosene. Oil products composed 
the largest share in agriculture energy consumption, at 32.8 ktoe or 76.8%, consisting of gas/diesel oil, excluding 
bio (25.2 ktoe) and other kerosene (7.6 ktoe). Figure A.1.6 describes the sectoral consumption by fuel types. 
Further analysis of sectoral energy consumption shows that: 
 The entire share of electricity was consumed for irrigation purposes; 
 Diesel fuel was only used by the agricultural machinery for crops sowing and harvesting;
 The amount of kerosene was insignificant and is assumed to have been used for other purposes. ;
#APPENDIX 2. ELECTRICITY GENERATION OPTIONS FOR TIMESARMENIA
#1. INTRODUCTION 
This Appendix describes the power plant options available in the TIMES-Armenia model. If not otherwise 
noted, the main source for data is Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015 Edition, prepared by the Nuclear 
Energy Agency and International Energy Agency and published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (NEA/IEA/OECD, 2015). It complies power plant data across a selection of countries, but 
where the only non-OECD country included in this list is China. 
#2. GAS-FIRED GENERATING TECHNOLOGIES 
The Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015 report identifies two gas-fired generation options: combinedcycle gas turbines (CCGTs) and open-cycle gas turbines (OCGTs). It includes data for 17 natural gas-fired 
generators (13 CCGTs and 4 OCGTs). For TIMES-Armenia four CCGTs and 4 OCGTS were chosen from 
same countries (Belgium, Germany, UK, New Zealand) and their characteristics were averaged. For fossil fuel 
plants, the residual value of equipment and materials shall normally be assumed to be equal to the cost of 
dismantling and site restoration, resulting in a zero net cost of decommissioning. 
The Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015 doesn’t identify any emerging technology for gas-fired 
generating technologies, this is why no additional options are considered.
#3. NUCLEAR GENERATING TECHNOLOGIES 
There are many different designs of nuclear plants available around the world and a dedicated feasibility study 
would be required to analyze the application of different options for Armenia. The comparison of different 
nuclear plant designs is outside of the scope and capacities of TIMES-Armenia project, however to analyze the 
competitiveness of nuclear options against other power plant options in meeting Armenia’s future electricity 
demands it is important to establish consistent characteristics for the different plant options. Given the 
relatively near-term need of Armenia, focus is made on most advanced and mature technology currently
available, which is advanced light water reactor (ALWR). ALWRs can either be pressurized water (PWR) or 
boiling water (BWR). Russian VVER, considered as an option for Armenia, is also ALWR type. For Armenia, 
the size of nuclear plant is important. Because of this, the economy of scale of nuclear plants was applied to 
calculate the costs of smaller versions of ALWR, establishing consistent data for competitive analysis of nuclear 
plants of different size, as discussion below. 
The Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015 provides detailed information for 11 nuclear power plants, of 
which 9 are in OECD member countries and the remaining two are in China. This includes a generic light 
water reactor (LWR), ten advanced light water reactors and generic generation III reactors. For new designs, 
net plant capacities range from around 1,000 to 3,300 MW (for a multiple-unit plant in the United Kingdom). 
All the reactors in this report are based on light water technologies, indicating that the industry trend towards 
this technology continues. TABLE lists the nuclear plants in Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015. 
As seen from TABLE there is there is a large difference in nuclear costs between Europe, US and Asia. Because 
of this fact, it is important to consider the origin of the possible power plants for Armenia. The Russian VVER 
version, for example, is the one deployed in Hungary, with a cost of 6,215 USD2013/kW. Another study for 
South Africa shows an estimated overnight capital cost of $50-billion (including owners development costs 
but excluding interest during construction) for a 9.6 GW nuclear fleet with a net output of 6 x 1,082 MW using 
Rosatom VVER 1200 reactors, an overnight cost of USD5,776 per kW net output is calculated. However cost
for a single unit will be higher by 10 to 20%, which will result in the number around 6,600 USD/kW. As seen 
from TABLE the Chinese, Korean and US versions are considerably cheaper. Based on this we suggest two 
versions of ALWR, one based on average characteristics of ALWR globally and the second based solely on 
Hungary data. 
It should be mentioned that TABLE also includes the nuclear power plant in Mohovce, Slovak Republic, which 
consists of 2 blocks with 513MW each. However, this is for a project originally initiated in 1986, the design of 
which has evolved substantially from the original water-cooled and water-moderated reactor (VVER) V-213 
specifications, because of this it is not considered. 
Emerging nuclear technologies in the 2015-2030 timeframe include small modular reactors (SMRs), essentially 
based on the same technology as today’s generation III reactors (namely light water reactors). There are wideranging projections for installed SMR capacity by 2030. Because of their size the specific per-MW costs of SMRs 
are likely to be higher (typically 50% to 100% higher per kWh for a single SMR plant) than those of large 
generation III reactors. Variable costs (O&M and fuel costs) for SMRs most likely will remain higher than for 
large nuclear plants as well. 
Based on Current Status, Technical Feasibility and Economics of Small Nuclear Reactors (NEA 2011), because of 
economies of scale, SMRs will suffer a significant economic disadvantage compared to large reactors in terms of 
their overnight costs per unit of installed capacity. Specific capital costs (i.e. capital costs per unit of installed 
capacity) are expected to decrease with size because of fixed set-up costs (e.g. siting activities or earth works 
for connecting to the transmission grid), more efficient utilization of primary inputs (e.g. raw materials), and the 
higher performance of larger components (e.g. pumps, heat exchangers, steam generators, etc.). Several 
studies have employed the following scaling function to illustrate the effect of changing from a plant unit size P0
to a plant of similar design with capacity P1: 
Cost(P1) = Cost(P0)x(P1/P0)n (1)
where Cost(P1) and Cost(P0) are the costs of power plants of size P1 and P0 respectively, and n is the scaling 
factor for the entire plant (this is an overall scaling law for the entire plant—different components of the plant 
may have substantially different scaling exponentsCurrent Status, Technical Feasibility and Economics of Small 
Nuclear Reactors gives some examples of n. For Korea n=0.45, for France n=0.6 for direct costs and 0.3 for 
indirect costs. For this study we have assumed the scaling factor of 0.6 for overnight and O&M costs. Because 
we consider the SMRs of same LWR type, the application of Formula (1) is valid. TABLE and TABLE A.2.4 
show alternative suggestions for nuclear plants. The most feasible one should be chosen for the main analysis, 
whereas the second one can be used for sensitivity analysis.
However, economies of volume could compensate economies of scale if a sufficiently large number of identical 
SMR designs are built and replicated in factory assembly workshops. Lower overall investment costs and 
shorter construction times for SMRs could also facilitate the financing of such reactors compared to large 
nuclear plants at lower costs of capital). Furthermore, they can be more discretely sized accorded to the 
capacity needed owing to the modular nature of the design. So, other sensitivity scenarios can be performed 
for higher n in formula (1) which will analyze the sensitivity of results compared to the future costs of SMRs. 
In all cases Decommissioning costs for nuclear plants are higher than those for other generation types, in part 
because of the additional cost of removing all remaining radioactive materials. Plant-specific decommissioning 
costs were used when provided, and a default assumption of 15% of the overnight cost was used for all other 
plants. 
Prototypes of generation IV reactors, that could include very-high-temperature reactors (VHTR) for electricity 
and process heat applications, and liquid metal-cooled reactors such as sodium-cooled fast reactors (SFR) and 
lead-cooled fast reactors (LFR), were not considered. In terms of generation costs, generation IV technologies 
aim to be at least as competitive as generation III technologies (and will build on the enhanced safety levels of 
those technologies), though the additional complexity of these designs, the need to develop a specific supply 
chain for these reactors and the development of the associated fuel cycles will make this a challenging task. 
However, generation IV also provide additional benefits in terms of fuel utilization and waste management 
(especially for fast neutron reactors) or in terms of high thermal efficiency (>40%), and potential for high 
temperature process heat application for HTRs and this could represent an economic advantage over 
alternative technologies.
#4. SOLAR POWER PLANTS 
Solar PV plants are divided into three categories: Residential rooftop (less than 20 kWe), Commercial rooftop 
(from 20 kWe to 1 MWe), and large (greater than 1 MW) ground-mounted central plants. In addition we 
consider solar thermal technologies, which are able to produce significant amounts of power (installation sizes 
tend to range from the tens to hundreds of megawatts) and can be used with thermal storage solutions such as 
molten salts to extend their electric power production into peak evening hours. Conversely, solar thermal 
power plants use more materials, in particular steel, than other types of solar power, and so are relatively 
more capital-intensive and will often also have higher operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. For Armenia, 
we have selected two options from the US, one with 6-hour storage, which reaches annual Capacity Factor 
(CF) =34% and another with 12 hour storage reaching CF=50, as opposed to PVs whose CF range between 
15%-20% in US). However, for Armenia country-specific CFs are used for all Solar plants. 
#5. OTHER POWER PLANTS 
Other power plants include hydro, geothermal and onshore wind plants. Country specific CFs should be used 
in all cases. Hydroelectric and geothermal plants are very site-specific, so it is advisable to use country-specific 
costs and CFs. Decommissioning costs are assumed to be 5% of overnight costs. See Section 7 below for 
additional details.
The lower costs for the dams are caused by the fact that these represent non-power dams, where cost 
includes adding the power house and raceways, transformer bay, etc., but the cost of the dam (primarily for
irrigation and flood control) is not included. If dams are to be considered for Armenia, the local country
specific costs should be used. 
#6. ELECTRICITY STORAGE TECHNOLOGIES 
Energy storage technologies absorb energy and store it for a period of time before releasing it to supply energy 
or power services. Through this process, storage technologies can bridge temporal and geographical gaps 
between energy supply and demand. Some technologies such as pumped storage hydropower are mature; 
however, improvements can be made with respect to the ratio of electric capacity to storage volume; flexibility 
in pumping mode with variable-speed pumps, and sea water pumped storage hydropower, to better help 
integrate variable renewables. Most other technologies are still at early stages of development and will require 
further RD&D before their potential can be fully realized. Emerging electricity storage technologies include 
compressed air energy storage (CAES), adiabatic CAES, a range of batteries, flywheels and hydrogen storage. 
Investment in energy storage RD&D has led to significant cost reductions. In addition, costs for large-scale 
batteries have shown impressive reductions, thanks in part to ambitious electric vehicle deployment programs 
and greater demand for frequency regulation. The cost of a lithium-ion battery for grid-scale storage has shown 
the largest decline, falling by more than three-quarters between 2008 and 2013. However, additional efforts, 
including targeted R&D investments and demonstration projects, are needed to further decrease energy 
storage costs and accelerate development. The setup for TIMES-Armenia is based on lithium-ion battery from 
report from National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).
#7. DESCRIPTION OF ARMENIA-SPECIFIC OPTIONS 
#7.1.1 RENEWABLES DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS 
#7.1.1.1 SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZE HPPS 
Lack of fossil fuel in Armenia dictates the necessity to utilize domestic energy sources (hydro, wind, solar, etc.) 
as much as ecologically and economically feasible. 
With respect to small hydro resources, according to PSRC data, in addition to existing 186 small hydro power 
plants (SHPPs) with total installed capacity 336.4 MW, 31 companies have licenses for construction of 56.88 
MW SHPPs. At this stage, no additional SHPPs are foreseen for construction due to new more stringent 
ecological and technical requirements, changes in water resources patterns, in part due to global warming, and 
the absence of economically feasible locations.
As stated by Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources, there is still potential for development
of medium-size HPPs , in particular Lori-Berd, Shnokh and Meghri. Below are some main indicators for these 
projects. 
#Lori-Berd HPP 
Construction of the Lori-Berd HPP (with around 60MW of installed capacity and 200 million kWh of annual 
energy production) on the Dzoraget river plays important role for the Armenian hydro energy sector 
development. In the years 2003-2004 Fichtner prepared a feasibility study for the above-mentioned station. In 
February 2007, Fichtner updated the price calculations for the project. Price increases were mostly attributed 
to higher equipment cost. 
Lori-Berd HPP Is planned to be constructed in the northern part of Armenia, where there are not large 
production entities, and would strengthen the energy supply to the northern parts of the country, as well as 
provide the energy system with opportunities for parallel operation between Armenia and Georgia. It is 
foreseen to implement the Lori-Berd HPP construction by attracting private financial investment. 
Lori-Berd HPP characteristics are as follows: 
 Design head – 343 m (with daily regulated pond) – 311.75 m (without daily regulated pond); 
 Design discharge - 25 m3/s (with daily regulated pond) - 20 m3/s (without daily regulated pond); 
 Design Power Capacity - 65.3 MW (with daily regulated pond) - 54.3 MW (without daily regulated pond);
 Annual average Energy Production - 202.9 million kWh (with daily regulated pond) - 208.3 million kWh 
(without daily regulated pond). ;
#Shnokh HPP 
The original design of Shnokh HPP was prepared by Armhydroenergy Project in 1966 and was updated in 1993. 
Construction of the Armanis reservoir with 130 million m3 capacity would allow to construct a power station 
with 120 MW of the installed capacity and 460 million kWh annual energy production. The head pond of 
Shnokh HPP would be constructed at the top of the Debet River, after the unification of Dzoraget and Pambak 
rivers. It is foreseen to correct the flow of Marts and Kistum steams on the derivation of Shnokh HPP. 
The characteristics of the Shnokh HPP, without construction of Armanis reservoir, are as follows: 
 Design head - 247.3 m; 
 Design discharge - 37 m3/s; 
 Design Power Capacity - 76 MW; 
 Annual Energy Production - 291.4 million kWh; 
 Derivation Length-22 km;
 Daily regulated pond - 450 thous.m3. ;
On August 10, 2017, the GoA adopted Protocol Decision N 973-A “On approval of Framework Agreement 
signed between the Government of Armenia, Debed Hydro LLC and Investors Club of Armenia Closed-end 
Contractual Nonpublic Investment Fund for the Design, Construction, Funding, Ownership, Possession and
Exploitation of Shnokh Hydropower Plant with 76 MW Installed Capacity in Lori Region of RA. A 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed between Debed Hydro LLC, subsidiary of Energy Invest 
Holding CJSC and the U.S. Robbins Company, that has substantial international experience in boring large 
tunnels. According to the MOU, Robbins would invest charter capital for Debed Hydro LLC by providing a 
Tunnel Boring Machine for boring the water pipe with 22 km length foreseen by Shnokh HPP construction 
program, training local Armenian specialists in use of the boring machine, and provide technical support during 
duration of the boring works. The estimated cost of the implementation of Shnokh HPP construction program 
is about 150-190 million USD. 
#Meghri HPP 
The feasibility study of Meghri HPP was prepared by the Iranian Mahab Ghods consulting company at the 
bequest of the Iranian Water and Energy Development Company. The feasibility study for development of 
Meghri HPP was coordinated and controlled by Armenian-Iranian Joint Technical Committee. In accordance 
with the feasibility study completed in 2008 the possibility to construct 2 HPPs on the river Araks: Meghri HPP 
in Armenian side and Gharachilar HPP on Iranian side is foreseen. 
Megri HPP's main technical characteristics are as follows: 
 Design discharge 160 m3/s; 
 Design Power Capacity 100 (2х50) MW; 
 Energy Production 793 million kWh; 
 Derivation length (tunnel) 18200 m; 
 Tunnel Inner diameter 8.5 m; 
 Design head 90 m . ;
In the framework of Armenia’s inter-governmental commission with Iran, it was decided to construct Meghri 
HPP and Gharachilar HPP with 100 MW installed capacity each, taking into the considerations the water 
resources new survey results. 
#Small HPPs 
As of the 1st of January, 2018 and according to the provided licenses, 36 additional SHPPs are under 
construction, amounting to about 69 MW capacity and 250 million kWh electricity annual supply. 
#7.1.1.2 SOLAR 
Armenia has a significant solar energy potential. The average annual amount of solar energy flow per square 
meter of horizontal surface is about 1,720 kWh, compared with the average European figure of 1,000 kWh. 
One fourth of the country’s territory is endowed with solar energy resources of 1,850 kWh/m2/year. 
A Renewable Energy Investment Plan for Armenia was approved in the framework of the Scaling-Up 
Renewable Energy Program (SREP) of the Climate Investment Funds, with SREP resources are being allocated 
to develop up to 110 MW of utility-scale solar PV. 
According to the first stage of the “Solar PV Plant Construction Investment Project” approved by GoA 
Protocol Decision 53-37 dated December 29, 2016, it is foreseen to construct the utility-scale Masrik-1 solar
PV power plant with 50-55 MW capacity in Gegharkunik Marz of Armenia. Construction of another 5 PV plants
with about 60 MW total capacity are being planned. 
On July 18, 2018 the Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources signed a Government Assistance 
Agreement “On Design, Funding, Construction, Ownership, Possession and Exploitation of Masrik-1 PV power 
plant in Mets Masrik community of Gegharkunik Region of Armenia”. The parties of the Agreement are FRV 
Masrik CJSC (as a Constructor), Fotowatio Renewable Ventures B.V and FSL companies (as a Sponsor) and the 
Government of RA. 
The limit for the construction of utility-scale Solar PV Plant of up to 1 MW installed capacity is set at 10 MW 
total installed capacity, and 12 companies have received Licenses. Currently 4 solar PV plants (total installed 
capacity about 2.6 MW) are commissioned. 
#7.1.1.3 WIND 
According to Wind Energy Resource Atlas of Armenia, prepared by the U.S. National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory in 2003, the economically justified potential of wind energy is about 450 MW of total installed 
capacity with about 1.26 billion kWh of electrical energy production per year. The main perspective sites are 
located in Zod pass, in Bazum Mountain (Qaraqhach and Pushkin passes), in Jajur pass, in the territory of 
Geghama Mountains, in Sevan pass, in the region of Aparan, in highlands between Sisian and Goris, in the region 
of Meghri. 
Monitoring of the wind potential at Sotk pass in Gegharkunik region has been completed by Zod Wind CJSC 
private company. The company is negotiating with different organizations to attract the investment for 
construction of the Zod wind farm, with planned installed capacity of 20 MW. 
Monitoring of wind potential at Karakhach pass in Shirak region has been completed by Ar Energy, Armenian - 
Italian private company. The company is planning to construct the Qaraqhach 1 wind farm, with initial planned 
capacity of 20 MW, which will be enlarged later up to 140 MW. 
#Proposed Investments Projects 
In the framework of the EU TACIS program “Assistance to Energy Policy of Armenia”, monitoring work has 
been carried at Semyonovka pass in Sevan region and the pre-feasibility study for construction of a wind power 
plant with total installed capacity of 34 MW was prepared. 
#Acciona Energy Global SL (Spain) 
By the Memorandum of Understanding signed on March 30, 2017 between the Ministry of Energy 
Infrastructures and Natural Resources of RA and Acciona Energy Global SL on Wind Power Plant Construction 
Program in Armenia, it is foreseen to construct wind power plants with capacity of 100-150 MW. In 
December 2017, the company started implementation of the wind potential assessment. Two 80 meter wind 
monitoring stations and one Sodar system were installed. Each station is equipped with 8 anemometers, 3 
weathercocks, 2 thermo-hygrometers and 1 atmospheric pressure gauge. 
#Access Infra Central Asia Limited (United Arab Emirates) 
According to relevant decision of the GoA dated March 30, 2017, assistance is provided to Access Infra 
Central Asia Limited (UAE) for construction of wind power stations in Armenia with capacity up to 150 MW.
According to relevant decision of the GoA dated March 30, 2017, assistance is provided to Access Infra
another was planned to be installed in April 2018. 
#7.1.1.4 OTHERS 
#Geothermal energy 
Investigations have been conducted to reveal the precise sites of geothermal energy sources for possible 
construction of geothermal power plants. One of these sites is Jermaghbyur where, according to geological and 
geophysical explorations, a high pressure (20-25 atmosphere pressure) hot water (at up to 250օC) resource is 
considered to be available at a depth of 2,500 -3,000 meters. If confirmed, it would be possible to construct a 
geothermal power plant with 25 MW capacity in this area. 
#Biogas 
Biomass is not widely used as a power or gas source in Armenia. Annual potential of Armenia for receiving 
biogas is about 135 million m3 and the country have just initiated its utilization. A contract between Yerevan 
Municipality and Japan Shimizu Corporation was signed for implementation of the Nubarashen Solid Waste 
Landfill Gas Capture and Power Generation Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) Project in Yerevan. 
According to the calculations of Shimizu Corporation, implementation of each phase of the mentioned project 
would result in annual creation of certificated reduction of CO2 emissions equal at least 56,000 tons. 
#Bioethanol 
The Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund of Armenia, with the assistance of a WB and GEF grant 
has organized a study on “Assessment of Bioethanol Production, Potential Utilization and Perspectives in 
Armenia” in which the project of bioethanol production potential is prepared for investors.
#APPENDIX 3. GENERAL INPUT DATA FOR TIMES-ARMENIA 
Based on the discussions in the MEINR the following data is considered for modeling. 
#1. Planning period
Data for specific events and policies will be entered in the model for the years in which they are expected to 
occur. Other data (e.g., demand projections) will be specified according to the MileStoneYears. 
#2. GDP growth 
Historical GDP in Armenia (2007-2017)
Simplified average annual GDP growth for the last decade (2007-2017) is 3.5%. If we are considering only 
economy recovery period (2010-2017) then GDP growth is amounted to 4.0%. Taking into consideration high 
GDP growth for 2017 (7.5%) the following GDP forecast done by International Monetary Fund can be used for 
TIMES-Armenia model. Anyway, another option could be the WB forecast due to low average GDP growth 
(3.6%) for the period 2013-2017.
#IMF forecast of annual GDP growth
(currently in the model) 
2018 6.0% ;
2019 4.8% ;
2020 4.5% ;
2021 4.5% ;
2022 4.5% ;
2023 4.5% ;
#WB forecast of annual GDP growth38
2018 4.1% ;
2019 4.0% ;
2020 4.0% ;
The last value of GDP growth remains unchanged till the end of planning period! 
#3. Generation capacities 
#3.1. Available capacities (Base Year-2016) + as of the end of 2017
#3.2. Potential Capacities 
#4. International agreement on gas/electricity swap 
Base case: Up to end of planning period (2036) exports will remain at the current level: 1,200 GWh/year – 
400 million m3 of natural gas – forced
After 2027, two scenarios should be considered: 
a. Swap – optional at the contractual level 6,900 GWh/year – 2,300 million m3
b. No swap – forced (if TIMES will choose continuation of agreement) 
#5. Electricity Import and export 
a. North: Currently no electricity exchange takes place between Armenia and North. There is only net 
zero balance condition required in the future. 
b. South: Currently no electricity exchange takes place between Armenia and South, other than to cover 
the swap. There is a net zero balance condition required from one Agreement, and 3 kWh for each 1 
m3 – the second Agreement. 
#6. Gas Import price 
Up to 2026 gas price will be kept at current level ($150/1000m3), thereafter – European commercial prices 
apply, WB forecast
#7. Energy Efficiency - Ministry of Energy Infrastructures and Natural Resources 
Energy efficiency is modelled as an 8%55reduction of overall energy demand.
#APPENDIX 4. MAIN RESULTS FOR CORE SCENARIOS 
In the sections that follow key results are presented for each of the core policy scenarios examined. 