File Name: LKA-CPD-2022-EN
Year: 2022
Country Name: Sri Lanka
Country Code: LKA
Category: CPD
Document Title: Country programme document for Sri Lanka (2023–2027)
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 29 August–1 September 2022
Start Year: 2023
End Year: 2027
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------
#I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework

1. Sri Lanka is experiencing one of the worst economic crises since independence in 1948, 
with twin crises – depleted dollar reserves and excessive debt overhang. A build-up of debt 
sustainability and public finance issues over several decades were exacerbated by the Easter 
Sunday attacks in 2019, which led to a dip in growth. The COVID-19 pandemic compounded 
these issues, with further loss of tourism revenue and the impact of lockdown measures. By 
April 2022, the crisis was acute, with dollar reserves at record lows, affecting the purchase of 
essential commodities and leading to shortages of fuel, gas, food and medicine. Together with 
the devaluation of the rupee, this has pushed up the cost of living by at least 30 per cent to 
40 per cent. Given the reduced tax base,low government revenue, and sparse foreign direct 
investment, the fiscal space remains constrained. Businesses have been heavily impacted,
wages are insufficient to sustain a basic standard of living. The rising inflation rates signal that 
the number of poor households will likely increase from 11.9 per cent in 2019-2020.2 The social 
protection system does not provide adequate relief, resulting in new poor and vulnerable groups.
2. Against this background, Sri Lanka faces challenges in protecting development gains. In 
2021, the global Sustainable Development Goals Index3ranked it 87th of 165 countries. 
Disparities and inequalities in poverty and vulnerability for specific groups –women, young 
people, the elderly, the disabled and minorities – have intensified. Sri Lanka ranks low on the 
Global Gender Gap Index, 2021, of the World Economic Forum – at116th out of 156 countries 
and among the bottom 10 countries for political representation of women, with only 5.3 per cent 
in Parliament. Rights-based legislative and policy frameworks for disability inclusion remain 
largely unimplemented. 
3. The onset of the socio-political and socio-economic crisis in 2022, and the rising trend in 
public protests, indicate a build-up of frustration in a context of weakened governance 
structures, perceived absence of accountability, and incoherent planning across multiple 
political cycles. The crisis and the public demand for reform that reintroduces independent 
oversight mechanisms, strengthens parliament, and removes the unrestrained power of the 
executive branch, have provoked the initiation of constitutional reform. The report of the 
United Nations Human Rights Commission, in March 2022, underscored the deteriorating 
status of human rights and heightened risks to social cohesion. 
4. Sri Lanka ranks among the top 10 most climate-vulnerable countries on the Climate Risk 
Index. Projected changes of climate are expected to impact its poorest and marginalized 
communities the most. Conservation and sustainable natural resource management will be 
pivotal for the long recovery and growth trajectory. In 2021, Sri Lanka updated its Nationally 
Determined Contributions, renewing commitments to increase forest cover up to 32 per cent,
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 14.5 per cent by 2030, and achieve carbon neutrality in 
electricity generation with no capacity addition of coal power plants by 2050. 
5. The United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework (UNSDCF), with
its four mutually reinforcing strategic priorities and six outcome areas, responds to the policy 
priorities of the Government and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and focuses
on equity and ‘leaving no-one behind’. UNDP will contribute to all six UNSDCF outcomes, 
primarily to No. 2, Inclusive, green-led recovery and growth; No. 3, Climate resilience and 
environmental sustainability; No. 4, Governance, justice and rule of law; and No. 5. Social 
cohesion and human rights. Gender is mainstreamed across the outcomes, ensuring contribution 
to outcome 
6. Inter-Parliamentary Union6. The continuous decline in official development assistance increased the need for exploring 
alternative and blended sources of financing for development activities, with international 
financial institutions, the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and non-traditional and 
private sector partners (United Nations Global Compact, Biodiversity Sri Lanka). While 
government financing through UNDP projects has been limited due to fiscal constraints, 
alternative models such as increased in-kind support, implementation support to loans from 
international financial institutions, and subnational level partnerships are being explored. 
Scaling up the South-South partnership to promote renewable and green energy will be further 
explored.
7. This country programme will build on recommendations of the 2018-2022 programme 
evaluation, which noted the success of UNDP in adapting its governance work to 
transformational shifts in context; its strong partnership with the Ministry of Justice; and its 
nimbleness in programming. The evaluation noted the holistic approach of UNDP to engaging 
the private sector, leveraging influence on economic empowerment, social cohesion, and
progress towards meeting gender-responsive targets. UNDP received the Gender Silver Seal in 
2021, and is aiming for gold in 2022, demonstrating a firm commitment to gender inclusion in 
its programming and management practices. The evaluation noted the access UNDP has to 
vertical funds, such as the Green Climate Fund, assessed to have catalysed improved water 
management for agriculture and drinking; disaster early warning; and standards and precedents 
for bottom-up, intersectoral interventions.
8. As a development partner in Sri Lanka for 55 years, UNDP brings five key comparative 
advantages to support its development priorities through the UNSDCF: (a) Partnerships and
convening power, allowing for a multidimensional approach to policy and programming, with 
strong links to both civil society and private sector stakeholders. UNDP supported the 
development of a national action plan to address sexual and gender-based violence, 2016-2020,
and the preparation of the 2023-2027 plan, also demonstrating leadership in disability inclusion;
(b) Integrated solutions to Sustainable Development Goals acceleration through improved 
planning and financing – including Goals-aligned budgeting, tax reform, strengthening data 
architecture, linkages across sectors such as sustainable tourism and environment, and vertical 
linkages between national and subnational levels. Since volunteer-involving organizations and 
volunteers play a crucial role in localizing the goals, such platforms and partnerships will be 
leveraged; (c) policy and thought leadership, drawing upon the UNDP Global Policy Network 
as well as country-level platforms such as the Colombo Development Dialogues, an established 
‘brand’ with policy credibility; (d) Innovation and digital-led approaches. UNDP is home to
the first dedicated social innovation facility in South Asia – the Citra Lab, which provides space 
for experimentation based on principles of human-centred design and systems thinking to 
address complex development challenges, provide strategic support to programmes and 
advance the digital transformation agenda. UNDP is (e) an agile development partner, able to 
pilot solutions and take them to scale, as evidenced by its reaching over 2 million Sri Lankans 
to date through its Global Environment Facility Small Grants Programme, resettlement, 
capacity development for local government, and youth entrepreneurship and skills programmes.
9. The overarching theory of change of the programme suggests pathways for all people in 
Sri Lanka, especially the most vulnerable, to contribute to and benefit from inclusive and 
sustainable development in a resilient, peaceful and cohesive society. The pathway to more 
inclusive green recovery and growth comprises evidence-based economic policies that
decouple growth from environmental degradation; incentivize low-carbon, climate-sensitive 
investments; promote innovation, entrepreneurship and decent job creation for women and 
youth; and facilitate better access to financing and markets. To expand equitable human 
development, social and economic policies need to be augmented by rights-based, better 
targeted, higher-quality services to build the resilience and socio-economic mobility of 
vulnerable groups. Transformation of economic and social policies will require an underpinning 
system of governance based on the rule of law which is responsive, accountable, just, and able to effectively perform core government functions, deliver services, and enable social cohesion. 
Strengthening policy development and (increasingly digital) service delivery capacities, 
ensuring the independence and efficacy of the judiciary, improving oversight of the branches 
of government, and creating hate-intolerant spaces for meaningful, constructive engagement 
with and among the public are key elements of the pathway to greater public trust and fulfilment 
of individuals’ rights. The theory of change further suggests that the realization of potential 
development gains from the above measures will depend upon the extent to which society is
able to increase the agency and social capital of women and marginalized groups.

#II. Programme priorities and partnerships
10. The country programme seeks to address the deepening socio-political and economic crises 
and their consequences – particularly for vulnerable groups – guided by the principle of ‘leaving
no one behind’, and to support resilient recovery and sustainable human development to limit 
regression of development gains and minimize backsliding on the attainment of the goals. 
Consultations (facilitated by the National Planning Department), as well as civil society 
partners, informed the programme design.
11. Special attention will be paid to: (a) driving gender equality and women’s empowerment,
across all outcomes and in marginalized and rural areas, through greater participation in 
decision-making and more equitable access to economic and natural resources; (b) a twin-track 
approach to ensuring that the rights and potential of persons with disabilities are realized by 
supporting the commitments Sri Lanka has made to differently abled and disabled people on 
rights to economic and social security and equal opportunities to improve quality of life; and 
(c) including young people as partners and agents, drawing on the Youth 2030 Strategy. 
12. Understanding the barriers faced by vulnerable individuals, groups and geographical areas, 
and prioritizing support for actions to ensure that needs and rights are addressed, will be central 
to the country programme. The programme takes a crisis-prevention and risk-informed, agile 
approach, given past challenges, future uncertainties, the unprecedented scale of the current 
socio-economic situation, and the converging crises. 
13. The country programme will build on the comparative advantages of UNDP as it 
contributes to the UNSDCF within three broad priority areas: Social inclusion and 
macroeconomic stability; Green development and Inclusive governance and justice, peace and 
social cohesion.
Social inclusion and macroeconomic stability (outcome 1) 
14. UNDP will substantially increase its support to alleviating the human development impact 
of the socio-economic crises and will support immediate relief and recovery efforts. With the 
United Nations Children’s Fund and the United Nations results group on social protection, 
UNDP will provide support to expanding social protection coverage for effective relief, and 
building resilience. Strengthening livelihoods will be a key focus, and, in collaboration with the 
World Food Programme and the Food and Agriculture Organization, UNDP will address 
impacts on food security, water security and agricultural production. This will include a lifecycle approach and horizontal expansion of social protection schemes, linking them to ‘cash+’
approaches that generate livelihoods and assets.
15. To minimize negative impacts on human development, macroeconomic policies must be 
designed to strengthen resilience to shocks and prevent the erosion of development gains 
achieved. UNDP will support the design of policy options for inclusive economic recovery, 
enabling public and private financing for the goals, including nature-positive financing, 
climate/Goals budgeting, and innovative financing options such as debt-for-nature swaps, 
green/blue bonds, and market intelligence on Sustainable Development Goals investment 
opportunities. For more diverse economic opportunities for women and youth, UNDP will 
leverage the Citra Social Innovation Lab to support digital transformation and create an enabling business environment for entrepreneurship with national and subnational institutions 
and the private sector. 
Green development (outcome 2)
16. Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction will be integrated into development 
plans in line with Nationally Determined Contributions, with the priority of addressing losses 
and damage at national and local levels while ensuring translation into budgets and actions.
Building on the long-lasting partnership with the Government, development and funding 
partners, and the private sector, the focus will be on strengthening the resilience of vulnerable 
communities, particularly in the dry and intermediate zones, and supporting women and youthled enterprises, especially in the tourism value chain.
17. UNDP will leverage its thought-leadership and provision of integrated solutions in climate, 
nature and energy towards green development through support to implementation of Nationally 
Determined Contributions, including gender standards, the National Climate Policy, and 
development of a ‘2050 Carbon Neutrality Roadmap’. Green principles will be integrated into 
the economic recovery process through a unified multisectoral partner platform for green 
development, under the leadership of the ministries of environment, finance, energy and 
economy – together with relevant United Nations entities; development partners, including the 
Global Environment Facility and the Green Climate Fund; the private sector; and civil society 
organizations. In response to the energy crisis, UNDP will facilitate a consultative process,
based on innovation and research, to enhance energy resilience and self-sufficiency. UNDP-led 
integrated programmes in chemical and health-care waste management, sustainable tourism and 
agriculture, renewable energy, greening of the transport sector, and the phase-out of ozonedepleting substances will support the green transition.
Inclusive governance, justice, peace and social cohesion (outcomes 3 and 4)
18. This priority area will be implemented through the UNDP flagship portfolio on Goal 16 to
address inequitable service delivery and capacity gaps; strengthen the efficacy and digitallydriven efficiency of key institutions to deliver people-centred services with a gender lens;
improve key governance functions; and promote peace and social cohesion through anticipatory 
and adaptive governance. It will address negative social trends, including hate speech, and 
harness opportunities that emerge from technology and social media. Early warning 
mechanisms will be strengthened to facilitate conflict prevention and sensitivity, including on 
managing environmental resource-based conflicts at the local level.
19. Evidence-based, innovative and consultative policy formulation and implementation will 
be promoted at the national and subnational levels. UNDP will engage key oversight institutions 
such as the Parliament and commissions to facilitate people’s participation in governance 
processes and strengthen recourse to remedy grievances. To address the lack of women’s 
participation in political processes, special attention will be paid to supporting women leaders, 
including the local councillors. UNDP’s flagship programme on local governance, funded by 
the European Union, will strengthen capacities of decentralized and devolved structures by 
promoting horizontal and vertical development planning, localization of the Goals, and 
effective, inclusive and people-centred service delivery.
20. To strengthen the rule of law and contribute to an accountable and responsive justice 
system, UNDP prioritizes justice sector reform, building on its long-standing partnership with 
the Ministry of Justice, supported by European Union and in collaboration with the 
United Nations Children’s Fund. Focus areas include: rights awareness and representation;
transparency of the justice sector; strengthened data capabilities; efficiency, coordination and 
capacity of a broad range of justice actors to advance legislative and policy reform; and judicial 
modernization in line with international standards and best practices. Victim-centric and 
gender-responsive legal services will be promoted, including for sexual and gender-based 
violence survivors, through victim and witness protection, legal aid, and continued support to strengthening women’s shelters. While the COVID-19 pandemic may have accelerated the use 
of digital technologies, a more strategic, whole-of-society shift towards digital transformation 
is required to bridge gaps in public service provision, improve efficiency, and provide better 
access for women and girls.
21. The previous country programme evaluation suggested a more active engagement with 
civil society, including enhancement of civic space and promotion of participation at all levels.
This will be pursued, along with platforms for social dialogue and volunteering. UNDP will 
support disability inclusion and mainstreaming of official languages to promote voice and 
representation.
22. An area-based approach will be adopted, in collaboration with other United Nations 
entities, to ensure integrated solutions. Its geographical focus will include the north, east, dry,
intermediate and southern zones, where pockets of severe poverty persist (outcome 1) and
where people are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change (outcome 2). This will 
contribute to addressing factors that could lead to social tensions and elevate conflict risk 
through additional stress on resource allocation, management and scarcity (outcome 4). Intercommunity tensions and conflict incidence directly contributing to physical and economic 
insecurity, with women at greater risk of violence and disempowerment (outcome 3), will also 
be addressed. As the single largest development partner supporting refugee communities 
returning to their lands, UNDP, in collaboration with the International Organization for 
Migration, will continue to support resettlement, embedding it in local development. UNDP 
will pursue strengthened environmental protection and natural resource management, including 
renewable energy and sustainable tourism linked to the outcome 2 objectives on green-led 
economic development and improved livelihoods (outcome 1). 

#III. Programme and risk management
23. UNDP will provide active leadership to Cooperation Framework Outcome Results Groups
3 and 4 and will guide joint planning, monitoring, and reporting, including through to the Joint 
Steering Committee. Annual planning and multi-year goal-setting for the country programme 
will be undertaken in partnership with the Government, through the establishment of a 
programme board as the governance mechanism. Implementation will benefit from a civil 
society advisory committee. Given the fluid circumstances in the country, UNDP will ensure 
continuous monitoring of the theory of change for variations in its key underlying assumptions,
as well as robust programme management mechanisms to adapt to consequential changes in the 
development context. Closely aligned with the Cooperation Framework which will be reviewed 
annually, a substantive midterm review will be undertaken, to ensure that the strategic focus is 
calibrated to the needs of Sri Lanka as it emerges from multiple crises.
24. With the deepening of internal fractures due to socio-economic crises with concomitant 
political dislocations, the possibility of increased inter-community tensions, violence and
uprisings due to social instability presents risks to social cohesion. UNDP will test, review and 
update contingency plans; revise and upscale the use of the United Nations crisis risk 
dashboard; and apply scenario planning, foresight based on political economy, and conflict 
analyses to modify or scale up existing programmes to mitigate escalation. 
25. Natural and climate-induced disasters, as well as future COVID-19 outbreaks or other 
pandemics, may affect the ability of communities and local stakeholders to stay engaged in 
development initiatives. Mitigating actions will include disaster preparedness and business 
continuity planning for uninterrupted programme delivery developed with United Nations
partners, government, civil society, and communities.
26. To ensure financial sustainability, UNDP will build on ongoing successful partner 
relationships and diversify partnerships through the Partnership and Communications Action 
Plan operationalized in 2020. A programme pipeline of strategic, gender transformative (‘GEN 3’), innovative and operational engagements will be developed to advance the priorities 
identified. UNDP will review its business processes to improve efficiency and cost 
effectiveness, including a staffing structure with appropriate capacities, in line with the new 
enterprise resource platforms and global clustering initiatives.
27. UNDP will proactively engage with the United Nations Country Team to evaluate and 
address emerging issues, anticipating changes in development and financial circumstances that 
may require programme and budgetary adjustments. As seen during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
UNDP has a track record of building flexibility and gender-responsiveness into programme
design and implementation, leveraging digital solutions and developing new ways of working. 
The dynamism of the Sri Lanka development context will require continued agility to respond 
to changes. UNDP will monitor the underlying assumptions/risks of the programme and ensure 
readiness for necessary adjustments.
28. The envisioned portfolio management approach will enhance integration, creating an 
effective policy-practice nexus with field-work feedback loops; promote effective collaboration 
between teams, including between programme and operations; and ensure the best use of 
available resources. UNDP will apply the revised social and environmental standards to 
enhance programme quality, and the enterprise risk management policy to conduct regular 
quality assurance and risk assessments throughout the programme cycle. UNDP will ensure 
that at least 15 per cent of programme expenditures are dedicated to initiatives where gender 
equality is a principal objective (‘GEN 3’).
29. This country programme document outlines UNDP contributions to national results and 
serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment and 
resources assigned to the programme at the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headquarters levels with respect to country programmes are prescribed in 
the Programme and Operations Policies and Procedures and the Internal Control Framework.
30. The programme will be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by direct execution for part or all of the programme in response to force majeure. The 
Harmonized Approach to Cash Transfers will be used in a coordinated fashion with other 
United Nations entities to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and classifications for 
programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned projects.

#IV. Monitoring and evaluation
31. The results and resources framework will serve as the main accountability framework, with 
programme outcome and output indicators and requisite targets. As recommended by the 
programme evaluation, UNDP will embed a robust evidence-based monitoring and evaluation 
system in the programme and its projects, combining qualitative and quantitative data, and will 
solicit citizen and beneficiary feedback to validate impact. 
32. UNDP will work with the Ministry of Finance (Departments of External Resources and 
National Planning) and other government institutions to ensure the involvement of national 
counterparts and beneficiaries in planning, monitoring and evaluation processes.
33. To facilitate data collection and analysis for monitoring the programme, UNSDCF, and the 
Goals, UNDP and its United Nations partners will support efforts to strengthen national 
statistical systems, reinforce results-based processes, and utilize innovative data collection and 
monitoring methods to identify and better target those left behind and capture transformative 
results. 
34. Recognizing the need for additional data sources, UNDP will utilize national data systems
– including the UNDP-supported national ‘SDG Data Portal’, to the extent possible – to monitor 
progress. Indicators are aligned to targets of the Goals and the UNDP Strategic Plan, gender 
strategy and parity strategy. UNDP will address data limitations associated with results and resources framework indicators through baseline studies. Guided by the country office gender 
strategy and gender action plan, UNDP will use gender analysis, the gender marker and 
gender-responsive indicators to plan and monitor gender-related investments and results.
35. Knowledge management systems will identify best practices – including from UNDP 
globally – promote synergies, and facilitate joint learning with implementing partners and 
beneficiaries. Projects will engage beneficiaries, particularly women, youth and vulnerable 
groups, in development solutions, monitoring and learning.
36. UNDP will allocate at least 3 per cent of the programme budget, proportionately charged 
to projects, to cover monitoring, evaluation and communication expenses. The costed 
evaluation plan indicates key project, programme and thematic evaluations to be undertaken to 
ensure learning and accountability. 
