File Name: LKA-NEP-2019-EN
Year: 2019
Country Name: Sri Lanka
Country Code: LKA
Category: NEP
Document Title: NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY AND STRATEGIES OF SRI LANKA
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2019
Start Year: 2019
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

#1. Inroduction
Global energy industry has entered a decisive phase of transition, where an increasing number of supply options,
newer energy carriers and the growing demand, contribute to increase the complexity of the industry. Sri Lanka
too, will face this transition during the next few decades, and the energy industry in transition will fuel the
growing economy of the country, opening many frontiers and opportunities. This policy spells out ways and
means of steering the energy sector in transition to power the nation and its social market economy,aiming at
higher levels of stability, security, affordability and sustainability with the least environmental burden,and provide
a fertile ground for all public and private enterprises, homes and institutions to flourish in a future, where
energy will not be a constraint.
Sri Lanka is ranked in the mid-range of United Nations Human Development Index, while the annual GDP per
capita too is in the mid-range, at USD 4,065 (2017)1
. The government’s drive to reach the upper middle-income
level within this decade intensifies the role of energy in Sri Lanka’s economy.As a nation embarking on a
progressive social market economy after a three decade-long conflict, a holistic approach to development is
desirable, compared with an incremental approach. An energy policy consistent with social and economic
development goals is required owing to significant impacts of the energy sector on each social and economic
activity of the country.
Sri Lanka maintains a comparatively lower energy intensity of economy, using 0.47TJ of commercial energy to
produce onemillion LKR of GDP2. The challenge posed to Sri Lanka is to maintain the lower energy intensity,
while accelerating the growth of the economy. Sri Lanka has reached the important milestone of 100%
electrification, thereby fulfilling the goal of providing modern energy sources to all the citizens.
Economic growth amidst universal access requires the energy supply capacity to be steadily increased. The
growth in demand can also be managed by improving the efficiency of energy conversion.Continued efforts to
maintain a low energy intensity status requires to be rewarded with a lower burden on the economy and the
environment. Increased efforts on demand management through policy driven incentives are required to meet
this goal amidst high economic growth.
Upgrading the transport modes to more efficient systems along with transport infrastructure development and
stimulating the use of other forms of energy beyond petroleum products through policy interventions would be
required to effectively manage energy use in transport, the largest consuming sector of commercial energy.
The relatively high share of renewable energy (RE) in the country’s primary energy portfolio is bound to
progressively reduce because the major portion of hydropower potential has already been tapped. With the
shifting of household energy use toward fossil fuels, the growing demand for all forms of energy is increasingly
being met with fossil fuels. Water resources serve multiple needs, power generation being the third priority
after drinking water and agricultural demand, further complicating issues related to projects such as the Mahaweli
Stage II development. A paradigm shift of policy is envisaged to defend and improve the share of renewables in
the primary energy supply from the level maintained at 55% during the last decade.
The National Energy Policy and Strategies present how Sri Lanka plans to meet the challenge of developing and
managing the energy sector to ensure delivery of reliable, cost-effective, and competitively priced energy
services from diverse sources to fuel the social market economy.
Sri Lanka weathered many energy crises over the last few decades due to resilience garnered from many deep
roots. These roots can be identified as the impressive use of biomass resources, year-round sunshine and
higher rainfall, combined with frugal lifestyle of her people and the small geographical expanse of the country.
Having nourished the national economy from these deep roots, Sri Lanka was first in the region to bare fruits,
in terms of extending the coverage of the national electricity supply to serve the whole country with an
uninterrupted supply. The reliability of energy systems has attracted services sector to the country, leveraging
more economic benefits to the country with the least possible input of energy. This has caused a structural
change in the economy towards services, in sharp contrast to other developing economies experiencing steep
growth in the energy intensity of economy.
Reliability and affordability of both indigenous and global energy supplies will be the most desirable ingredient
in this economy in transition. The country is looking into a future where strong emphasis will be on developing
the increasingly competitive newly assessed resources for electricity generation such as wind and solar. Biomass,
probably the most important energy resource, will play an even more valuable role by making a transformation
to a convenient fuel for household use and a dependable resource for industrial thermal energy supply.
Sri Lanka desires to be elevated to an ‘energy empowered’ nation by developing strategies and conversion
technologies to use the vast indigenous resources. Whilst continuous efforts will be made to strengthen the
petroleum sector from upstream resource development to downstream diversification, initiatives will be made
to elevate the status of electricity as a major energy carrier. Energy transition in the transport sector, from
liquid petroleum dominance to other energy carriers will be actively pursued. Electricity will take the pride of
place in the quest for discovering new energy carriers, drawing resources from increasing amounts of indigenous
resources, whilst securing supply routes for global resources. Whilst securing land resources for important
energy infrastructure elements such as gas terminals, electricity generation sites and transmission corridors,
energy storage will be taken as a prime carrier to transcend the space and time boundaries which constrained the
traditional energy systems.
Aligning Sri Lanka with Goal 7 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the UN, this policy would
contribute to achieve universal access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all by 2020, a
decade ahead of theUN target. The policy will also contribute to reduce the dependence of Sri Lanka on fossil
fuels to below 50% of the primary energy supply and to reduce the specific energy use across all end-uses by
20% of 2015 level, by 2030. This policy will pave the way to realise the vision of Sri Lanka in achieving carbon
neutrality and complete transition of all the energy value chains by 2050. The policy provides the necessary
space for establishing key manufacturing industries supplying sustainable energy technologies to the local market and forge alliances with other developing countries through South-South cooperation by developing
knowledge products and sustainable energy technologies in line with Goal 7 of the SDGs.

This policy document has three sections:
TheNational Energy Policy, stating the ten pillars of the policy framework
Implementing Strategies, describing the specific strategies to implement the policy
The Results Delivery Framework, elaborating the specific actions, milestones and the institutions responsible
This policy supersedes all previous policies, strategies,plans and guidelines published from time to time. This national
energy policy and implementing strategies will be in effect until it is reviewed in consideration of any major changes
in the external environment. Such policy reviews will be conducted at least once in six years. The Results Delivery
Framework, (separately published) aligned with the policy and strategies will be revised in two-year intervals.

#2 The National Energy Policy
The primary objective of the energy policy is to ensure energy security through supplies that are cleaner,
secure, economical and reliable, to provide convenient, affordable energy services to support socially equitable
development of Sri Lanka. Policy guidelines such as, the ‘General Policy Guidelines on the Electricity Industry’
as required under Sri Lanka Electricity Act No. 20 of 2009 statutorily required to be issued for each sub sector,
are expected to be prepared and issued, based on this national energy policy.
Working through the conflicting demands from the security, equity and sustainability dimensions, known as the
energy trilemma, Sri Lanka today is seen to be moving away from the delicate balance of these three forces.
The national energy policy is thus founded on ten pillars, rooted in the broad areas impacting the society,
economy and the environment, in an effort to counter balance the forces through enhanced equity, security and
sustainability, respectively.
1. Assuring Energy Security
2. Providing Access to Energy Services
3. Providing Energy Services at the Optimum Cost to the National Economy
4. Improving Energy Efficiency and Conservation
5. Enhancing Self Reliance
6. Caring for the Environment
7. Enhancing the Share of Renewable Energy
8. Strengthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector
9. Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure
10. Providing Opportunities for Innovation and Entrepreneurship


The ten pillars are described in greater detail below
1) Assuring Energy Security
Primary and secondary energy supplies of the country will be secured to ensure continuity, adequacy and
reliability.
2) Providing Access to Energy Services
Access to reliable, convenient, affordable, equitable and quality energy services will be provided to all citizens
to improve their living standards and to engage in gainful economic activities.
3) Providing Energy Services at the Optimum Cost to the National Economy
Energy services will be provided at the optimum long-term cost, to lower the burden on the national economy
and to achieve competitiveness of locally produced goods and services in international markets.
4) Improving Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Efficient use of energy will be promoted in all sectors and across the energy value chain, engaging both the
suppliers and users.
5) Enhancing Self Reliance
Indigenous energy resources will be developed to the optimum levels to minimise dependence on imported
resources, subject to resolving technical, economic, environmental and social constraints, with the objective
of minimising the vulnerability of energy supplies to external situations.
6) Caring for the Environment
A meaningful contribution to climate change will be made by maintaining the low carbon intensity of the Sri
Lankan energy sector. Adverse environmental and social impacts of energy services will be minimised to care
for the global and local environment.
7) Enhancing the Share of Renewable Energy
Indigenous renewable energy resources will be developed to the optimum level to attain sustainability and a
higher degree of resilience in the energy sector.
8) Strengthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector
Governance of the energy sector to be strengthened to realise accountability, fairness and transparency to
achieve investor and consumer confidence. A stable policy environment will be ensured, and the regulatory
framework will be further strengthened to assure good governance in the energy sector.
9) Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure
Strategic locations for establishing energy facilities and corridors which inter connect such facilities will be
earmarked and secured in advance to ensure timely implementation of such facilities and to minimise adverse
social impacts.
10) Providing Opportunities for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Considering the limitation to the scale of markets available in Sri Lanka to breed technology intensive local
businesses, the relatively large size of the energy sector will be utilised to nurture local entrepreneurship and
innovation.


#3. Implementing Strategies
The broad strategies to implement the national energy policy are detailed in this chapter, aligned with the
aforementioned ten pillars:
3.1 Assuring Energy Security
Primary and secondary energy resources and supplies used in the country will be secured to maximise the
country’s energy supply reliability, continuity and adequacy, and strategic independence by employing the
strategies:
3.1.1 Diversity in energy resources used in electricity generation will be ensured subject to economic,
environmental, technological and operational requirements.
3.1.2 Considering the recent price profiles, natural gas would be the next fossil fuel option for the country
to broaden diversity.A liquefied natural gas(LNG) terminal of optimum size and technology would
be established at the most suitable location. Considering the impact to the country’s energy security,
operation of the first terminal and LNG procurement shall be kept under state control.
3.1.3 Global diversification of energy sources will be pursued to safeguard the supply chain against external
geo-political uncertainties.
3.1.4 Percentage installed power generation capacity from a single imported fuel shall not exceed 50%
of the total installed firm capacity to safeguard against geopolitical uncertainties and fuel price
shocks.
3.1.5 Adequacy and reliability of transmission and distribution infrastructure in both electricity and fuel
supply networks to meet any future contingencies will be ensured.
3.1.6 Regular risk and assessments will be conducted to identify and mitigate possible internal, external
contingencies that could critically affect the performance of the energy sector.
3.1.7 Indigenous petroleum resources will be explored using geophysical surveys, and the national
petroleum data repository will be strengthened. Such resources will be strategically developed to
introduce into all sectors including power generation, transport, household and industry, as well as
to generate futuristic cleaner energy sources such as hydrogen and gas to liquids (GTL).
3.1.8 National requirements of electricity will be met with proven generation technologies and fuel sources.
3.1.9 Maintenance of strategic fuelreserves in strategic locations in the country will be made mandatory
for all key players in electricity and petroleum industries.
3.1.10 Local crude oil refining capacity will be expanded to optimally satisfy the country’s demand for
different petroleum products.
3.1.11 Viable cross-border electricity transmission and cooperation with countries in the region will be
pursued on the basis of multilateral power pool operation
3.2 Providing Access to Energy Services
Access to reliable, convenient, affordable, equitable and quality energy services will be provided to all
citizens to enhance their living standards and to engage in gainful economic activities, by employing the
strategies:

3.2.1 Access to electricity using either on-grid or off-grid sources and to modern petroleum products
will be ensured to all citizens in the country.
3.2.2 Small and medium enterprises will be supported by socialising part of initial electricity service
connection costs via tariffs.
3.2.3 Households which remain unconnected to national grid due to un-affordability, even after gaining
access, will be connected using innovative financing schemes.
3.2.4 New productive uses for electricity in agriculture, rural and primary industries will be encouraged
with emphasis on empowerment of women and youth.
3.2.5 The supply quality of energy services by electricity, gas and oil utilities will be improved through
adoption of appropriate technical and commercial quality standards.
3.2.6 Minimum service quality standards will be introduced for common utility services. Additionally,
premium services will be offered to customers who are willing to pay for such higher service
quality levels.
3.2.7 Equipment used in the energy supply chain will be standardised to ensure compatibility, ease of
integration and safety of energy supply.
3.2.8 Considering the superior reliability, increased safety and lower interference with tree cover,
electricity distribution networks will be gradually placed underground in urban areas and converted
to insulated aerial bundled conductors (ABC) in other areas.
3.2.9 Pipeline transport and vehicle-based transport will be promoted in downstream gas and oil supply
sector to improve access by industries and households to feed appropriate distribution networks at
the user end.
3.2.10 Smart grid technologies will be introduced, and smart metering will be deployed for enhanced
customer experience, and to automate power system management, reducing manual intervention
where such interventions are uneconomical.
3.2.11 Mobile and internet-based services will be introduced to enhance customer convenience.
3.3 Providing Energy Services at the Otimum Cost to the National Economy
Energy Service will be provided at the optimum long-term cost, to lower the burden on the national
economy and to achieve competitiveness of locally produced goods and services in international markets
by employing the strategies
3.3.1 Power plants identified in the Long-Term Generation Expansion Plan will be implemented as
scheduled.
3.3.2 Receiving, processing, storage, transport and distribution capacity requirements of the petroleum
sector will be identified in long term planning and will be developed in time to ensure adequate
supply of petroleum products.
3.3.3 Rational energy pricing strategies, based on the principles of cost reflectivity across the energy
value chain will be adopted through existing and new regulatory mechanisms, to ensure financial
health of sector utilities and to discourage wasteful energy use.

3.3.4 The government will identify and provide transparently funded subsidies to target groups of energy
users in household, industrial and commercial sectors,that deserve special consideration owing to
their economic standing and contribution to national economic development priorities.
3.4 Improving Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Energy systems will be effectively managed to ensure efficient use and conservation of energy. Efficient
use of energy by all concerned, from utilities to final customers will be pursued employing the strategies:
3.4.1 The national energy efficiency improvement and conservation programme will be further
strengthened engaging all stakeholders in household, industrial and commercial sectors.
3.4.2 Energy efficiency improvement and conservation will be promoted through minimum energy
performance standards and labelling of appliances, and by introducing green procurement processes
in state and private sector organisations.
3.4.3 A home productivity improvement programme, with energy efficiency and conservation as the central
theme will be launched to empower women.
3.4.4 Taxation and other incentives and disincentives to support the market for efficient technologies
will be introduced.
3.4.5 Expert energy advisory services will be offered through state and private sector service providers
to promote energy efficiency, conservation and energy cost reduction across all end use sectors.
3.4.6 Water resources will be recognized as a valuable indigenous energy resource.Efficient use of water
by competing users at places where there is a high opportunity cost to water will be enhanced.
3.4.7 Conversion efficiency of power generation facilities will be enhanced.
3.4.8 A strategic plan for street lighting will be formulated to ensure proper management of street lighting
that will enhance the safety of road users, and to contribute to energy conservation with a better
aesthetic sense.
3.4.9 Automated demand response technologies will be considered as a main demand-side management
strategy.
3.4.10 Losses in energy delivery networks will be reduced to optimum levels.
3.4.11 Losses incurred in petroleum refining will be reduced by continuous technology infusion with new
investments.
3.4.12 Transport fuel use in petroleum distribution will be reduced by utilising regional storage facilities
connected with the rail-based supply network.
3.4.13 Virtual offices and video/teleconferencing will be promoted by making necessary changes to
organisational working culture as a strategy to minimize physical movement.
3.4.14 Transport energy use will be reduced by undertaking ‘avoid, shift and improve’ strategies with a
strong focus on high quality public transport and intelligent traffic management solutions.
3.4.15 Economic activities will be developed in dense clusters to benefit from lower logistic costs and
improved synergies in special zones identified as smart cities, served by smart grids.
3.4.16 Sustainable neighbourhoods will be used as a key design element in urban development with the
objective of reducing energy demand.
3.4.17 Energy efficiency will be a primary concern in retrofits, and new building designs will be evaluated
for their energy performance on a mandatory basis.
3.4.18 Smart technologies, including smart buildings and complete conversion to smart metering will be
ensured to convey price signals to customers, altering the demand profile to reduce the overall cost
of supply.
3.4.19 Fuel efficiency of vehicles would be a key consideration in deciding applicable taxes on vehicles to
encourage a higher efficiency vehicle fleet.
3.5 Enhancing Self Reliance
Indigenous energy resources will be developed to optimum levels to minimise dependence on imported
resources, subject to resolving technical, economic, environmental and social constraints, with the
objective of minimising the vulnerability of energy supplies to external situations and to attain a higher
degree of resilience in the energy sector, employing the strategies:
3.5.1 Oil and natural gas resources of the country will be explored. Commercial scale exploitation will
be strategically phased, giving due consideration to higher future value and possible use in the
future as a locally available fuel source to derive cleaner futuristic energy sources such as hydrogen.
3.5.2 Indigenous mineral resources such as Thorianite and other similar nuclear fuels with commercial
resource potential will be explored, assessed and kept ready for development at the appropriate
time when conversion technologies are available.
3.5.3 Renewable energy resources will be exploited based on a priority order arrived at, considering
economics, technology and quality of each resource.
3.5.4 Availability of biomass will be enhanced by establishing dedicated energy plantations or plantations
with residue as a potential fuel, in prescribed biomass energy development areas. Commercial
availability of biomass and biomass-based fuel products will be encouraged for utilisation in industrial
thermal applications and household use. Processed biomass as a fuel source will be facilitated
through efficient collection of existing resources, processing, value addition, storage and
distribution, and nurturing biomass supply chains.
3.5.5 Improved biomass conversion devices such as cook stoves that are free from the general
inconvenience associated with traditional biomass-based cooking and offer an experience similar
to commercial fuel-based cooking devices, will be introduced and promoted for household use.
This strategy will help to retain the share of biomass as a fuel used for cooking applications and to
discourage migration to petroleum fuels owing to convenience.
3.5.6 Gradual diversification of transport energy in both rail and road transport from present oil dominance
to electricity will be encouraged to increase overall conversion efficiency and to relieve the
dependence on liquid petroleum fuels as the sole transport fuel. Further, appropriate time of use
tariffs will be offered to attract additional demand from electric vehicle charging to periods of
lower demand, and additional demand so added will be strategically used to enhance the integration
of indigenous sources such as solar and wind.

3.5.7 A sizable fund will be channelled to the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Fund operated by the SEA by
evoking provisions in the SEA Act for charging a cess on fossil fuel imports and a resource royalty
from renewable resources.Purposes of Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Fund will be broadened to
meet the requirements of sustainable energy, electricity and petroleum sectors.
3.5.8 Contribution of the rubber plantation industry as the major fuel wood supplier for thermal applications
will be duly recognised and suitable incentives will be provided to enhance the expanse of rubber
plantations.
3.6 Caring for the Environment
Natural environment of the country will be preserved, and a meaningful contribution will be made to
address climate change, by adopting appropriate low emission processes and mitigation measures
employing the strategies:
3.6.1 Environmental impacts of energy facilities will be minimised and mitigated using counter balancing
interventions such as carbon sequestration plantations. Existing hydropower catchments and land
earmarked for future energy infrastructure too will be considered as potential land for such
plantations.
3.6.2 Impacts to the environment in the context of climate change due to the construction and operation
of energy sector facilities will be minimised.
3.6.3 Energy supply from cleaner sources and technologies will be encouraged to minimise harm to the
local and global environment, while taking into consideration both the impacts on the national
economy and the long-term environmental benefits.
3.6.4 Indigenous petroleum and nuclear energy resources will be developed to the optimum level with
sufficient environmental safeguards,by encouraging market demand for such resources.
3.6.5 National level plans will be implemented to utilise by-products from power generation with a
commercial value, such as fly ash and waste heat.
3.6.6 Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to global emission reduction goals will be made to
meet the national emission reduction obligations as agreed.
3.6.7 Social and environmental externalities in the local context pertaining to the energy sector will be
studied and factored into decision making.
3.6.8 Opportunities available under carbon trading mechanisms will be exploited and a proper mechanism
will be implemented to make use of the potential.
3.6.9 Waste to energy projects will be favourably considered owing to the positive contributions such
projects make to dispose municipal solid waste, and any cost above the avoided cost of electricity
will be paid by the government/local authorities directly to the developer so as not to burden energy
utilities.
3.6.10 Necessary Health, Safety and Environmental (HSE) standards will be introduced and relevant
regulations enforced, making it an offence for a person to operate any energy related infrastructure
without complying with the prescribed HSE standards.


3.7 Enhancing the Share of Renewable Energy
Energy supply from renewable energy resources in the country’s energy mix will be increased to reduce
pressure on foreign exchange, as a means of engaging the local community in the energy industry, attain
sustainability and to promote the use of environmentally friendly energy sources employing the strategies:
3.7.1 Long delays encountered in renewable energy development will be reduced through a centrally
coordinated project approval process.
3.7.2 Renewable energy investments for electricity generation will be realised through a competitive
scheme to reduce the costs and to facilitate wider investor participation.
3.7.3 Transmission infrastructure will be strengthened to improve the absorption of electricity generation
from renewable sources.
3.7.4 Distribution infrastructure will be upgraded with smart grid technologies to facilitate renewable
energy-based distributed generation.
3.7.5 Research will be conducted to overcome adverse impacts of renewable energy absorption to the
power system from intermittent sources such as wind and solar energy.
3.7.6 Effective forecasting technologies for wind, solar and rainfall will be introduced so that optimum
use of renewable resources could be realised.
3.7.7 Energy storage solutions will be encouraged for firming intermittent renewable sources, voltage
and frequency regulation, local grid support, peak shaving and improving grid resilience.
3.7.8 Innovative financing schemes and financial instruments involving both public and private enterprises
will be introduced to encourage renewable energy development.
3.8 Strengthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector
Good governance in all aspects of the energy sector shall be the guiding principle, and good governance
in the energy sector will be strengthened to realise accountability, fairness and transparency to achieve
investor and consumer confidence. A stable policy environment and regulatory frameworks will be
established and further strengthened to assure good governance in the energy sector, employing the
strategies:
3.8.1 All sub sectors in the energy industry will be brought under respective regulatory framework.
3.8.2 Procurement of plant, equipment, crude oil and other fuels, as well as power purchase agreements
and similar concessions, will be made through a streamlined competitive bidding scheme ensuring
transparency,accountability and avoiding long term delays.
3.8.3 Capability of the energy sector professionals to meet challenges in the emerging competitive
environment will be enhanced by facilitating exchange programmes between similar entities in
foreign countries and cross posting within Sri Lankan sector entities.
3.8.4 Digitalisation of the energy sector entities using an enterprise resource planning platform will be
taken as a priority, spanning the whole length of the value chain from smart meters, addressable
appliances and smart grids that allows further adoption of new technologies such as artificial
intelligence (AI), internet of things (IoT) and distributed ledgers to drive efficiency, transparency
and optimisation of asset utilisation.

3.8.5 A guideline on management of digital information to ensure security of digital information, covering
the aspects of storing, use and management will be introduced.
3.8.6 Digitalisation of utility transactions will be used to secure and store data in cloud based central
databases and the data, information and knowledge thus assimilated in the energy sector will be
indexed, catalogued and securely stored for future use and will be treated as knowledge assets.
3.8.7 A conducive environment shall be created for independent decision making in a transparent and
accountable manner, supported by the analyses performed using real time insights produced by
digitalisation.
3.8.8 Energy sector transactions will be reported by relevant entities to the SEA on a fixed annual schedule,
through a working group of officials from key sector institutions to ensure timely publication of
the Sri Lanka Energy Balance.
3.8.9 Indices which can assist the understanding of energy sector trends will be identified and included in
national statistics to help evidence-based decision making.
3.8.10 Active engagement of citizens in the energy sector will be promoted using web portals linked to
applications for mobile phones, leading to awareness creation, grievance handling and education,
targeting the closure of trust deficit, greater acceptance of energy sector projects, user safety and
improved end-user behaviour of energy services.
3.9 Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure
Considering limitation to land with specific attributes that are required to develop certain technologies
and considering the extensive financial losses incurred in the past owing to shifting of sites to locate
power plants, strategic locations to establish future energy infrastructure will be earmarked and secured
in advance to ensure timely implementation of such facilities and to minimise adverse social impacts,
employing the strategies:
3.9.1 Suitable sites to locate future energy infrastructure such as coal, natural gas and nuclear power
plants, refineries and terminals will be strategically earmarked in advance following preliminary
feasibility studies, so that the public can avoid using such sites, resulting in minimal relocation and
social impacts at the time of actual development.
3.9.2 Best sites to locate large scale renewable energy infrastructure such as wind and solar farms would
be identified in advance and marked on a master plan so that they can be developed as large
concentrated facilities in phases.
3.9.3 Corridors for petroleum and gas pipe transport and for backbone electricity transmission would be
identified, giving priority to shared corridors for the benefit of national infrastructure planning.
Identified routes would be published for the purpose of giving advance information to the public.
3.9.4 Available corridors will be used to lay multiple pipelines and power transmission lines wherever
possible.
3.9.5 All existing and future underground utility infrastructure including electricity, water, communication,
town gas and petroleum would be made available in a common mandatory geographic information
system (GIS) to facilitate optimal location of future underground cable routes and pipe transport
traces.
3.9.6 Roadside utility infrastructure corridors including electricity distribution, sewer, water,
communication and gas supply shall be coordinated with transport infrastructure, in such a manner
that clear demarcation of ownership, flexibility of maintenance, and room for expansion would be
ensured.
3.10 Providing Opportunities for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Considering the limitation to the scale of markets available in Sri Lanka to breed technology intensive
local businesses, the relative vastness of the energy sector will be utilised to nurture local entrepreneurship
and innovation by actively engaging the strategies:
3.10.1 Electricity will be recognised as the dominant energy carrier of the future, and strategic ventures to
utilise local resources in energy conversion and storage equipment will be nurtured as an
industrialisation thrust.
3.10.2 Development of novel information and communications technology (ICT) applications such
asforpower system automation, remote control, distributed real time event and data acquisition
systems, and smart metering will be encouraged.
3.10.3 Sri Lankan enterprises will be encouraged to engage in energy sector infrastructure development.
3.10.4 Research and development on introducing, adopting and implementing new and emerging renewable
fuel sources,efficient energy conversion and end use technologies will be promoted.
3.10.5 Innovation will be facilitated by providing protection to intellectual property, safeguarding the same
until commercialisation and by nurturing nascent technologies through financial incentives and tax
benefits.
3.10.6 Indigenous knowledge and capacities required for energy sector development will be realised.
3.10.7 Potential offered by vehicle energy storage systems (ESS) will be studied considering ESS as a
local standby energy storage device, deploying those as an automated demand response (ADR)
option and a load profile management too.
3.10.8 Small scale on-grid distributed and off-grid stand-alone applications using renewable energy with
local value addition will be encouraged as an economic development thrust.

#4. Results Delivery Framework
This chapter describes the targets and likely timeframes associated with expected policy intents
and the assignment of responsibilities of realisation of policy intents.They are to be reviewed
in two-year intervals and re-stated for the period ahead.

4.1 Assuring Energy Security
To execute strategies identified to realise energy security, the following targets and
milestones will be met by the institutions to which responsibilities are assigned.
1a Feasibility of cross border electricity transfer with countries in the region will be
studied and documented by end 2021.
1b Feasibility of the Sapugaskanda oil refinery expansion project will be evaluated
by end-2020undertaking a study to determine the optimum capacity, and a
preliminary investigation on establishing a second refinery will be undertaken by
mid-2021 by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation.
1c Every player in the petroleum subsector and all grid connected thermal power
plants shall jointly maintain a strategic fuel reserve equivalent to a minimum 30
days’ consumption at any given time. The Petroleum Corporation and the CEB
shall be jointly responsible to agree on targets for local storage capacity to be
developed and maintained by either party. All future power plant specifications
must contain appropriate storage capacities to be maintained locally.
1d A high-level standing committee to be titled as ‘Energy Sector Risk Assessment
Panel’to be established with sufficient representation from key sectors by end2019to assess possible internal and external contingencies that could critically
affect the performance of the energy sector. Members of this committee must
also include co-opted specialists on the subject of risk assessment and be given
the required training on how to identify such risks.This panel must meet
periodically and identify such contingencies based on probability-impact analysis
and advise sector agencies to prepare plans to mitigate impacts of the same.
Secretary of the Ministry in charge of the subject of electricity shall be responsible
to appoint and convene this panel.
1e An inventory of indigenous energy resources, both renewable and nonrenewable,will be developed and published by SEA and PRDS by end-2020.Air
borne gravity/magnetic data will be acquired and processed by end 2019 and 2D/
3D seismic data in selected locations in Mannar and Cauvery Basins will be
completed by 2022.
4.2 Providing Access to Energy Services
To ensure access to reliable, convenient, affordable, equitable and quality energy services
to all citizens to enhance their living standards and to engage in gainful economic
activities, the following targets and milestones will be met by institutions to which
responsibilities are assigned;
2a To encourage prospective small and medium scale industries and businesses, the
initial cost of obtaining an electricity connection, which may be considerable at
present compared with the capital cost of the business, will be reduced by offering
a special concessionary package under which the entire cost of the transformer
for contract demands up to 100kVA will be waived-off and be socialised through distribution tariffs. This should be fully implemented from January-2021by CEB/
LECO, accompanied with an appropriate campaign giving wide publicity through
media.
2b The initial cost in providing a new connection to recover infrastructure cost by
electricity distribution utilities will be completely phased out by end-2022, to all
categories of customers.Such costs will be socialised through distribution tariffs,
aiming at improving the country’s rank below 50, in ‘ease of doing business’ index.
2c Optional ‘same day’ service connections to households and other retail customers
to be provided on the payment of a premium fee for any prospective customer by
mid-2020.Similarly, a portfolio of other cost recovery services shall be offered
at a premium for customers who are in need for expeditious service delivery.
Timeline for regular service will be subject to codes on commercial quality
specified by PUCSL.
2d Commercial supply of biomass and biomass-based fuel products will be doubled
to reach one million tonne per year for using industrial thermal applications and
households through the establishment of 20,000 hectares of biomass plantations
within the period 2020-2023as an initiative of SEA.Government land, soft
financing and other fiscal incentives will be offered to businesses that provide
fuel wood including dedicated energy plantations and other commercial plantations.
2e To encourage improved, convenient, commercial biomass fuel products and
conversion technologies for household use, SEA shall ensure that fiscal incentives
are provided to entrepreneurs who are engaged in the manufacture and distribution
of equipment using such technologies (e.g. improved cook stoves and minigasifiers)by end-2020. SEA shall ensure a minimum 5% penetration of improved
stoves using commercialised biomass fuels by 2021.
2f Supply quality standards of fuels supplied by petroleum utilities will be determined
and enforced on a voluntary basis by mid-2020 and on mandatory basis by end
2021 by PUCSL, and quality test reports will be published.
2g Supply and service quality standards of energy services by the utilities will be
determined and enforced on voluntary basis by end 2020 and on mandatory basis
from end 2021 by PUCSL.
2h All new low voltage distribution networks will use all-insulated ABC with
immediate effect. Low voltage overhead electricity distribution networks outside
urban areas will be completely converted to all-insulated ABC by 2025. Distribution
networks in urban areas will be converted to an underground network by 2030.
2i A technical audit covering the whole value chain of the utilities will be carried
out. Specifications, status and standards of key equipment will be recorded, and a
standardisation programme will be launched within 2020 by the CEB and the LECO.
2j Feasibility of extending and introducing new pipeline transport facilities for both
liquid and gaseous fuels to serve dense clusters of industrial and residential users
will be studied by 2021.
2k Five pilot projects, covering the five distribution licensees will be launched by
the CEB and the LECO within 2020 to identify smart grid and smart metering
technologies which can deliver value to the country.

2l Smart meters and pre-paid meters shall be offered on-demand to any customer
by mid-2020.
2m At least 50% of all standard services offered by the CEB and the LECO to be
made optionally available through mobile and internet platforms too, including
payments and tracking of progress, by mid-2020 so that customers are not required
to visit utility offices to initiate such services. By end-2021, all standard services
to be offered optionally via mobile and internet.
4.3 Providing Energy Supply Services at the Optimum Cost to the National Economy
To ensure that energy services are provided at the optimum long-term cost to lower the
burden on the national economy, the following targets and milestones will have to be
met by the institutions to which responsibilities are assigned;
3a A transparent pricing methodology for electricity and fossil fuel products will be
developed and implemented by mid-2020 by the CEB, the CPC and other sector
players through a regulatory mechanism established by the PUCSL.
3b The life-line electricity tariff will be limited only to low-user household customers
using less than 30kWh per month. A study will be conducted by MoPE in 2020 to
decide other target groups of energy users that deserve special consideration,
the subsidy amount and the source of funds.
3c A short-term and medium-term planning mechanism, and a continuous planning
procedure will be established for the petroleum sector, including both liquid and
gaseous fuels by end 2019. First plan to be issued in 2020.
4.4 Improving Energy Efficiency and Conservation
Energy systems will be efficiently managed and operated while ensuring efficient
utilisation and conservation of energy. The following targets and milestones will have
to be met by the institutions to which responsibilities are assigned.
4a Specific energy use in end-user activities will be reduced by 10% of 2015 level
by 2023as part of the national energy efficiency improvement and conservation
programme, saving 1,243GWh of grid electricity generation by 2023.
4b Minimum energy performance standards for LEDs and energy labelling for airconditioners, personal computers, refrigerators, ceiling fans, linear fluorescent
lamps/ballasts and induction motors will be enforced by mid-2020.
4c Penetration of efficient, low smoke, low soot biomass cook stoves will be
increased to 10% of households by 2022. Processed, commercialized biomassbased fuels used in such stoves will be made widely available across the retail
market by creating an enabling environment.
4d ‘Energy Manager’ scheme will be implemented on a mandatory basis by end 2019to
designated users and extended to the remaining institutional users by 2020.
4e Reduced duty and taxation of efficient equipment supported by an accelerated
depreciation scheme will be offered to building renovation and retrofitting
industry to improve the energy efficiency of the existing building stock by 2020.

4f A differential taxation scheme for commercial buildings will be introduced, based
on a simplified energy utilisation index by end 2020. A similar scheme to support
the market for efficient technologies will be introduced by end-2020, through a
green procurement process led by the state sector.
4g Power generation facilities will be subjected to a thorough energy audit to evaluate
generator efficiencies and efficiency of auxiliary systems, and a sector-wide
efficiency improvement programme will be launched in 2020.
4h A lighting standard for street lighting, to cater to rural, urban and major road
illumination including other public space lighting requirements will be introduced
and implemented on a mandatory basis within 2020.
4i A pilot scale automated demand response project will be implemented by mid2021, and the techno-economic viability of the intervention will be documented
for scaling up as appropriate.
4j Overall system losses in the electricity grid will be reduced to 7.5% of net
generation by 2020.
4k Reactive power management will be further intensified by introducing a scheme
to discourage demand for reactive energy by end users through an appropriate
volume-based fee.
4l Modal share of mass transport will be enhanced by a margin of 10%compared to
the 2016 share by 2023 by adopting avoid, shift and improve strategies and
intelligent multimodal transport management solutions for major cities in the
country, by Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation.
4m At least 30% of all government institutional head offices and regional head offices
to have teleconferencing facilities to hold tele-meetings by 2021. All main
government offices must have teleconferencing facilities by 2020. The participation
of officers, who require more than one hour of travel time to participate at meetings
must be discouraged from attending physically and be connected via
teleconferencing facilities established at all ministries from end 2019.
4n All routine services offered at government agencies that do not require physical
presence must be made available via internet or mobile phone to minimize transport
energy use from 2020.
4o A performance-based energy efficiency building code for commercial buildings
will be made mandatory by end 2019and a voluntary scheme for domestic sector
will be introduced by end 2019.
4p Incorporation of building management systems with a focus on energy management
and future opportunities in smart grid driven automated demand response will be
made a mandatory planning criterion for all commercial developments by 2020by
the UDA.

4.5 Enhancing Self Reliance
Indigenous energy resources will be developed to the optimum levels to minimise
dependence on imported resources and to attain a higher degree of resilience in the
energy sector. The following targets and milestones will have to be met by the institutions
to which responsibilities are assigned.
5a Feasibility studies on the use of natural gas/renewable energy-based hydrogen
and GTL in transport and other sectors will be carried out by 2022.
5b Renewable energy resources will be exploited based on a priority order arrived
at, considering economics, technology and quality of resource. Wind is identified
as the second most promising renewable energy resource after hydropower and
highest priority is given to develop wind to realize a minimum 20% share of
electricity generated from renewable energy sources excluding major hydro, by
2022by the SEA in association with relevant public and private sector players.
5c At least 10,000 hectare of unproductive land will be prescribed as biomass energy
development areas, and leased to developers by the SEA starting from 2020 over
a period of 5 years to develop as commercial timber cum fuel wood plantations.
5d Biomass supply chains in five regions will be supported through improved
collection of biomass residue, mixed cropping and certification of sustainable
extraction for a three-year duration until they reach commercialisation through a
pilot project by 2020 by the SEA.
5e The most widely used suburban rail corridors between Colombo and the Airport,
Avissawella, Negombo, Panadura and Veyangodawill be upgraded and electrified
by mid-2023, and other viable railways in provincial city suburbs will be upgraded
and electrified by 2025.
5f At least 20% of all new light vehicle registrations shall be electric vehicles in
2022. At least 25 new public electric vehicle charging stations with DC rapid
charging capability will be established at strategic locations by the CEB/LECO
by 2020. SEA will encourage the private sector to set up their own charging
stations to complement the CEB/LECO efforts, by securing fiscal incentives to
the industry.
4.6 Caring for the Environment
A meaningful contribution to climate change will be made by maintaining the low carbon
intensity of Sri Lankan energy sector. Adverse environmental and social impacts of
energy services will be minimized to care for the global and local environment by
achieving the following targets and milestones by the institutions to which
responsibilities are assigned;
6a The CEB is to reduce incremental carbon footprint of electricity due to future
coal power plant additions by reducing GHG emission levels using carbon
sequestration plantations. A feasibility study will be done by the CEB in 2020,
outlining possible sequestration plantation options, land availability and financial
analysis.

6b Stack emissions of energy sector facilities will be constantly
monitored and reported in the public domain by 2020, to manage
and reduce emission burden from the energy sector.
6c A closed loop storage and distribution system will be established
gradually by the CPC starting from 2020 for lighter fuels with
high potential for vaporisation.
6d HSE standards for all energy sector utilities will be introduced
by 2020 and fully implemented by 2022.
4.7 Enhancing the Share of Renewable Energy
Renewable energy resources in the country’s energy mix will be
increased, meeting the targets and milestones;
7a An advisory committee comprising ministry officials in-charge
of different line agencies/custodians of land resources will be
appointed to coordinate the approval of renewable energy
projects and acquisition of land resources for such projects by
end 2019.
7b After careful analysis of the network constraints, dispatch
options and resource characteristics, a comprehensive renewable
energy grid integration plan will be published by the CEB from
2020 and periodically updated.
7c A fully-fledged competitive bidding scheme for renewable
energyinvestments will be implemented through a resource
development programme to realise a pipeline of ‘ready to invest’
projects by mid-2020 by the SEA, realising 20% of generation
witha cumulative renewable energy generation capacity of 1,600
MW by 2023.
7d Applications received by the SEA when feed-in tariffs were on
offer, but held up due to the termination to feed in tariffs, which
are at various stages of the approval process will be channeled
to a competitive bidding model by using suitable interim
approaches such as offering project proponents preferential
treatments when they were opened up for
competition considering the maturity of a project, investments
made, etc. A list of such alternate options will be jointly
developed by the CEB and the SEAby mid 2020for different
technologies, considering their inherent attributes so that all such
projects in abeyance could be expeditiously developed within a
competitive bidding framework by end 2023.
7e Advanced forecasting systems for hydro, solar and wind energy
will be established by the CEB along with other relevant line
agencies by end-2020.

7f A premium green tariff/green energy certification package will be offered to all
interested electricity customer segments as an optional tariff and a portion of
incremental proceeds will be used for renewable energydevelopment by crediting
to the Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Fund.
4.8 Strenthening Good Governance in the Energy Sector
A stable policy environment will be established and regulatory frameworks will be further
strengthened to assure good governance in the energy sector by achieving the following
targets and milestones by the institutions to which responsibilities are assigned.
8a Ministry in charge of the function of petroleum resource development shall ensure
that necessary legislation for upstream petroleum development are enacted by
mid-2020, including necessary legislation to establish an upstream petroleum
development regulatory mechanism.
8b Establish a regulatory framework and empower an independent regulatory
institution by enacting the necessary legislation to regulate downstream petroleum
industry, by end-2020.
8c Functional units of CEB to adopt independent financial reporting from financial
year 2019, in accordance with the Electricity Act 2009.
8d Digitalisation of the electricity utility sector will be launched by 2020, and
completed through a phased approach by 2022, covering the whole value chain
from the optimal operation of core assets to managing customer relationships.
8e A data governance policy for ensuring the proper management of digital
information of energy sector utilities will be introduced to ensure security, data
quality and privacy by mid-2020.
8f Reporting of energy sector transactions by key sector entities will be regularised
by appointing a working group under the leadership of the SEA by end 2019, and
the Sri Lanka Energy Balance for each year will be published by the SEA within
the first six months after the end of each calendar year, commencing with that of
year 2019.
8g All energy sector projects and investment opportunities will be identified and
documented in self-standing project concept formats from 2020 by each agency
for easy take-up by investors and development partners on a competitive basis.
8h Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) aligned with economic goals will be introduced
for energy utilities by end-2019, monitored and published by the respective
Ministries from 2020.
8i Establish clear guidelines to implement public-private partnership in developing
energy infrastructure, by mid-2020.
8j Study and report the potential benefits and pre-requisites, and an action plan to
establish a wholesale market for electricity and to allow power wheeling in the
transmission and distribution network, by end-2020.


8k An application will be developed for mobile phone access by
2020, to engage the end users to increase awareness on best
energy options, record grievances, price trends and energy
efficiency improvement by extending the online energy database
already operated by the SEA
4.9 Securing Land for Future Energy Infrastructure
Strategic locations to establish future energy infrastructure will be
earmarked and secured in advance to ensure timely implementation of
such facilities and to minimise adverse social impacts by achieving
the following targets and milestones by the institutions to which
responsibilities are assigned.
9a A strategic facilities layout map, identifying suitable sites to
locate future energy infrastructure such as coal, natural gas and
nuclear plants, refineries and terminals will be prepared by 2020
in consultation with the National Physical Planning Department
by a joint committee appointed for the purpose.
9b A master plan identifying the best sites to locate large scale
renewable infrastructure such as wind and solar farms would be
formulated and published by end 2019with a development time
horizon 2020-2025.
9c Petroleum, gas pipe transport and backbone electricity
transmission line corridors that are to be developed during 2020
- 2030 will be identified and published as a map by a joint
committee by 2020.
9d Based on already available GIS elements, a national GIS database
depicting existing and future underground utility infrastructure
including electrical, water, communication and petroleum will
be established by 2020 by the CEB.
9e An inter-agency utility corridor coordination authority to resolve
conflicts will be established by2020.
4.10 Providing Opportunities for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Considering the vastness of the sector, opportunities available for
research and development, and local value addition in the energy sector
which can improve sector productivity will be actively pursued to
engage the Sri Lankan innovators and entrepreneurs.
10a A 25% local preference will be granted to Sri Lankan enterprises
and joint ventures led by such enterprises to encourage such
enterprises to engage in energy sector infrastructure
development,from2019.
10b A coordinated research and development network involving all
research and development organisations will be established by
the SEA, assembling both industry and academia in a grand
alliance by mid-2020, and ten pilot projects on home grown renewable energy
conversion technologies and ten energy efficiency improvement technologies will
be introduced by the SEA by mid-2021, protecting intellectual properties amassed
until commercialisation.
10c Smart grid pilot projects will be deployed in five identified locations to
demonstrate the possibilities of better management of generation, transmission
and distribution assets, to allow new and present customers to use electricity in
the most efficient manner and to allow large scale/deep penetrated deployment
of dispersed renewable energy generators using advanced ICT in measurement,
control and management of electrical grids by end 2020 bythe CEB/LECO.
10d An automated demand response pilot project will be implemented, and impacts
documented to allow economic evaluation of the same as a future generation option
by end 2021,by the CEB/LECO.
10e Digitised data accumulated from the advent of digital technologies in utility
operations will be retained, processed and used as a knowledge asset.
10f Indigenous knowledge and capacities required for energy sector development will
be nurtured by introducing a contribution-based reward scheme to encourage
individual efforts by sector professionals and pooling of knowledge resources
across the energy sector by 2020.
