File Name: NER-NREP-2013-EN
Year: 2013
Country Name: Niger
Country Code: NER
Category: NREP
Document Title: NIGER RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 2013
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2013
Start Year: 2013
End Year: 2035
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

NIGER RENEWABLES READINESS ASSESSMENT 2013. 

#EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Niger is a landlocked country in West Africa and a member of the 
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It has a 
surface area of 1,267,000 square kilometres (km2), and population of 
16 million with an annual growth rate of 3.3%. Over the past ten years, 
the Nigerien economy grew at an average rate of 5%, but only grew 
2.3% in 2011, because of a poor harvest and a severe food grain shortage. However, it bounced back in 2012, growing by 13%, according to the 
African Development Bank. The economy is dominated by agriculture, 
forestry and livestock, which contribute 43% of gross domestic product 
(GDP) and employ about 80% of the country’s workforce. The energy 
balance in dominated by biomass, which represents 79% of total energy 
consumption and meets 83% of household energy needs, followed by 
petroleum products (18%) and mineral coal for electricity generation 
(3%). Renewables other than biomass remain negligible at less than 1%. 
The energy sector in Niger is at a critical crossroads. The country 
has recently discovered oil and gas. This will contribute to widening 
energy access and allow the country to solve the enormous problem 
of household energy access through a liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) 
programme. Niger also aims to move towards greater electricity security by investing in domestic power production, thereby reducing its 
dependence on imports from Nigeria. However, Niger’s energy demand 
is growing rapidly, and significant pent-up demand continues to be 
felt from businesses and socio-economic development sectors, which 
continue to experience shortages and blackouts. To address this, Niger 
needs to explore a variety of technological options to diversify its 
energy supply base and build stability in the energy sector. This would 
include harnessing the country’s significant renewable energy resources 
and accelerating their exploitation to power the growing economy. The 
government recognises the important role renewable energy will play in 
Niger’s future energy infrastructure, providing input to both centralised 
and decentralised systems. Policies are currently being developed and 
relevant laws drafted to create the governance structure required for a 
credible energy access and security programme. Like in most countries in the region, the 
energy sector in Niger is characterised by 
parallel energy systems, the traditional and 
the modernised. Both face intrinsic challenges, which cross all sectors and affect 
the whole population. Current biomass 
use in Niger has major health implications, 
especially for women. It also has significant 
environmental implications in terms of 
land degradation and deforestation. With 
the population increasing at over 3% per 
annum (p.a.), the pressure on humans and 
ecosystems will continue to increase. 
Electricity – in terms of both quality and 
access – is a key challenge for Niger. The 
existing power infrastructure is underdeveloped, and the country continues to rely 
heavily on imported electricity from neighbouring Nigeria. Niger has been importing electricity at a very low price, which 
has historically served as a disincentive to 
boosting its own generation capacity. There 
are occasional power-supply interruptions 
from Nigeria due to technical problems, 
and these highlight Niger’s vulnerability in 
the arrangement between the two countries. Load shedding and blackouts are 
as commonplace in Niger as in Nigeria, 
prompting most businesses and urban 
households to invest in portable diesel 
generators, or “gen-sets”, as a standby 
power source. The impact of voltage fluctuations, spikes, blackouts, brownouts 
and other disruptions has been considerable for the wider economy. Energy insecurity has, therefore, become a barrier to 
development. 
The West African Power Pool (WAPP) 
represents an opportunity for Niger. As 
part of its contribution to WAPP, Niger 
will invest in two fossil-fuel (coal and gas) 
power generation systems. However, major 
View over the Niger River
Photo: IRENA/H. Lucasproportion of the power expected to be 
generated through WAPP will be hydropower. Given the scale of power produced 
through the power pool, as well as power 
production and transmission challenges in 
Niger, the country is likely to benefit noticeably in terms of cheaper and more reliable 
electricity. 
Broadening energy access is a central 
national development objective in Niger. 
At present, less than 25% of the population 
enjoys access to electricity, and the picture 
in rural areas is bleaker, at less than 5% 
electricity access. Generation of electricity 
through renewables has long been viewed 
as an important way to close this gap. 
However, the focus on the contribution 
that renewables could make to the national 
grid has only emerged because new technologies are beginning to compete with 
conventional power generation. To this 
end, an energy policy is needed, embracing renewables as part of a longer-term 
energy vision. This must include a systematic roadmap for delivery, supported by 
research and financial support. 
Off-grid renewable power can meet the 
demand in currently unserved rural areas. 
Niger, still in the early stages of building 
its energy infrastructure, has the opportunity to develop and invest in its energy 
system in a planned and systematic 
manner. At the moment, the rural electrification programme relies largely on 
international donors. However, Niger has 
begun to allocate funding to meet the cost 
of implementing decentralised renewable 
technologies for a range of social development needs. This effort could be extended 
to productive sectors in rural areas, since 
renewable energy systems, with their flexibility and scalability, are especially wellsuited to meeting rural energy demand. 
Niger possesses significant renewable 
energy resources to meet its present 
and future energy needs. The country 
is endowed with abundant solar energy 
resources, good biomass resources in its 
southern parts, and a modest wind regime, 
especially towards the north. These 
resources can be harnessed to bring higher-quality energy services to populations 
across the country. 
Niger was one of the first countries across 
the world to consider renewable energy 
technologies as a solution to its energy 
needs. This dates back to the 1960s, 
when Niger set up the Solar Energy Office 
(Office de l’Energie Solaire – ONERSOL), 
later renamed the National Solar Energy 
Centre (Centre National d'Énergie Solaire 
– CNES). ONERSOL was founded to undertake applied renewable energy research, 
provide diagnostic studies on renewable 
energy technology use, and run training programmes on renewable energy 
systems. Yet this ambitious and promising 
programme did not achieve its intended 
goal of creating a strong renewable energy 
technical capability for the West African 
region. This was because financial resources 
for sustaining the programme dried up and 
priorities shifted. 
The Government of Niger views providing 
reliable electricity and other basic energy 
services to all populations and parts of the 
country as a critical aspect of its inclusive 
economic transformation plans. It also 
recognises decentralised renewable energy 
options as a cost-effective alternative to 
grid expansion in many rural areas. 
The government electrification strategy 
has embraced both grid-based and off-grid 
options, although the main policy focus still 
remains on the former. 

#Key recommendations 
Niger needs to develop an energy policy 
that embraces renewables as part of a 
longer-term energy vision. The current 
strategy has set the objective of 10% 
renewables (excluding biomass) in the 
national energy mix by 2020. However, 
there are no specific guidelines or roadmap for reaching the target. This needs to 
be rectified, in order to provide sufficient 
substance to for the successive shorterterm targets needed to realise this goal. 
Additionally, work is about to begin in Niger 
to develop a master plan for the production and transmission of electricity, part 
of determining the country’s medium- to 
long-term investment priorities for developing the power sector (up to 2035). 
This offers a real opportunity to integrate 
renewable energy into future plans and also 
strengthen Niger’s case for support from 
development partners. To better inform 
the development of the master plan, the 
country’s solar and wind economic potential needs to be adequately quantified. 
Although Niger’s power generation sector 
has been opened to IPPs, renewable power 
projects have not come forward. The development and expansion of the country’s 
renewable energy market partly depends 
on the creation of a favourable legal and 
regulatory framework. This would, among 
other things, reduce technical, legal and 
administrative barriers while increasing 
private-sector confidence. An overarching 
renewable energy law would create the 
right conditions. Such a law should provide 
guaranteed access to the grid and priority 
dispatch of renewable electricity generation. These are currently lacking in the 
grid code. Furthermore, the development 
of a standardised, bankable PPA would 
greatly support the evolution of renewable energy auctioning. Transaction costs, 
which currently reflect lengthy permitting 
and administrative procedures, could be 
greatly reduced by setting up a one-stop 
shop for the private sector dealing with 
renewable energy projects. 
Niger’s Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
office, which has expressed the desire to 
promote solar power investments, could 
be mandated by the renewable energy law 
to become the permitting and licensing 
authority for all renewable energy projects. 
The law could also enshrine a bankable 
PPA model that would reduce the length 
and complexity of negotiations required 
with private sector for every investment. 
A model of this kind could open the door 
to self-producers and IPPs wishing to feed 
their electricity into the grid. It could also 
let in producers who wish to collaborate 
with utilities to hybridise existing fossil-fuel 
generators. PPP office capacities would 
need to be upgraded and streamlined, with 
clear, transparent administrative procedures being created for the private sector. 
Niger has been using auctions to select IPPs 
to provide power to the grid at competitive prices. Although these have for the 
most part been for conventional (fossilfuel) generators, the country can capitalise on this experience to design renewable 
energy auctions and support large-scale 
renewables deployment. Renewable energy 
auctions have already become a commonly 
used policy instrument in some countries. 
Such auctions have helped achieve largescale deployment in a cost-efficient and 
regulated manner, while allowing price 
discovery for renewable-energy based 
electricity through their inherent price 
competition, which also tends to boost the 
scale of competition. 
Niger needs a comprehensive energy 
policy that puts the needs and demands 
of rural communities at centre stage and 
provides clear guidance on how to achieve 
progress on rural energy services. The 
policy should confirm explicitly that rural communities need a bottom-up approach, 
due to their low energy demand and scattered nature. The comprehensive policy 
would bring together local development 
plans and information on resources, finance 
and skills, facilitating the design of coordinated plans of action, sensitive to location. 
An organisation must be established to 
manage, develop and implement Niger’s 
rural renewable electrification strategy and 
programme. The proposed organisation 
must also create enabling conditions for 
the private sector, ensure effective implementation, and maintain quality assurance. 
This organisation needs to be a legal entity. 
It could fill several important gaps. 
The proposed organisation must aim to 
optimise the use of resources for rural 
electrification and maintain mechanisms 
already in place, while upholding important principles. These include equity, technology neutrality, high technical standards, 
poverty eradication and the protection 
of investor interests. Furthermore, provisions should be made within the renewable 
energy law to amend the country’s current 
tax policies on renewable energy technologies. Amendments would include reducing 
current import duties and VAT that affect 
the competitiveness of renewable energy.
The rural electrification challenge is enormous and will require both external and 
domestic finance. Niger’s Renewables 
Readiness Assessment (RRA) drew attention to the importance of raising domestic 
finance, as well to calibrate internal investment with wider development goals. As 
the consultation process underscored, rural 
electrification should feature prominently 
within any such framework. 
Niger could consider raising funds to 
promote rural electrification from taxes 
on mineral and petroleum exploitation. 
Decentralised renewables, despite their 
comparative advantage in rural electrification in particular, are unsuitable for 
conventional financing because of their 
high transaction costs. 
In Niger, rural communities with little 
disposable income hardly feature as natural clients for conventional financial institutions. Soft loans can be attractive, requiring only a small sum as a down payment 
on the total price, with the rest being 
payable over a number of years. Therefore, 
grants from multilateral agencies or donors 
could be ring-fenced to mobilise soft loan 
schemes for household or community electrification. While this cannot be considered 
a long-term solution to the challenge of 
raising funding, it could provide energy 
for social development needs. It may also 
serve to stimulate the renewables market 
in rural areas. 
The cost of each type of technology, 
including hybrid technologies, needs to 
be assessed and documented in the different regions of the country. This would 
provide a dynamic data system, assembling data on the range of technologies 
and their performance under different 
conditions. The diesel based mini-grid 
operated by NIGELEC offers a compelling case for hybridisation with renewable 
energy sources. Solar irradiation is abundant throughout the country. Detailed 
feasibility studies on hybridising the diesel 
mini-grids with solar PV would, therefore, 
help demonstrate the economics of these 
systems to potential investors.
Niger will rely on technologies sourced 
from abroad for the foreseeable future. 
Technology imports must continue in 
tandem with efforts to upgrade innovation 
systems that will support domestic technology adoption and development. However, 
cheap solar panels and components are 
entering the Nigerien market from neigh-bouring countries, with no institutionalised 
quality assurance and standard schemes. 
This does not help the reputation of these 
technologies, still in their early stages, 
when systems break down. 
As part of the industry’s revitalisation, 
CNES could play an important role in 
supporting the development of renewable 
energy technology standards and certification schemes for installers. A programme of 
this kind would have the additional benefit 
of creating new skilled jobs throughout 
the value chain, from small distributors to 
installers, maintainers and end-users.
In various parts of the world, the biogas 
sector has delivered excellent results and 
supported rural development. Niger has 
significant potential for biogas, and feasibility studies in the biogas sector have 
been conclusive. The development of a 
biogas business model would be worth 
exploring for Niger, with a view to bringing 
microfinance institutions to the negotiating table to set up a commercially viable 
biogas industry, including innovative and 
effective financial structures. This would 
contribute to the well-being of the country’s population while reducing pressure on 
natural resources. 

#I. INTRODUCTION
Country background
Niger is a landlocked country in West Africa and a member of the 
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). It has a surface 
are of 1,267,000 square kilometres (km2), bordering Mali, Burkina Faso 
and Benin to the West, Nigeria to the South, Chad to the East and 
Algeria and Libya to the North. Niger is divided into eight regions, 36 
provinces and 265 districts. It is crossed by the Niger, the country’s only 
perennial river, which has a length of 550 km. Niger has a population of 
16 million with an annual growth rate of 3.3%. The population density is of 
12 people per km2. It is young (52% under 15 years of age), and predominantly rural (84%). However, it is undergoing a high urbanisation growth 
rate of about 6.2% p.a. (International Fund for Agricultural Development 
(IFAD), 2012); Institut National de la Statistique (INS), 2012).
Over the past ten years, the Nigerien economy grew at an average rate of 
5%, but only 2.3% in 2011 due to a poor harvest and a severe food grain 
shortage. However, it bounced back in 2012, growing by 13%, according to the African Economic Outlook (2013). This was helped by heavy 
rains that generated a surplus of over 5 million metric tons (t) of cereals 
(World Bank, 2013a). This clearly demonstrates the Nigerien economy’s 
direct dependence on rainfall and water availability. It also illustrates the 
country’s vulnerability to climate shocks and the importance of managing water resources to sustain development. Niger’s growth is attributed 
to an exceptionally dynamic secondary sector, which grew by almost 38% 
in 2012 driven by the extractive industries. Niger commenced oil production in late 2011 in a joint venture with the Chinese National Petroleum 
Corporation (CNPC). As part of this plan, a new refinery has been built 
with a capacity of 20,000 barrels per day. The emergence of oil on the 
Nigerien economic landscape has triggered new optimism concerning 
the country’s future development and balance of trade management. 
The economy is dominated by agriculture, forestry and livestock, which 
contribute 43% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and employ about 80% 
of the country’s workforce (IMF, 2013). Given the country’s location in 
the Sahel region, these sectors are highly vulnerable to climate variability, leading to frequent droughts and affecting productivity. Service and commercial sectors are also major contributors to the economy, accounting for 41% 
of GDP. 
Although it is a fast growing sector with 
significant potential, heavy industry 
accounts for only 16% of GDP. Uranium, 
gold, coal and limestone are the principal 
products mined, contributing 6.3% of GDP 
in 2011. With the emergence of oil production as a major activity, exports from the 
extractive industries are expected to double 
by 2016 compared to 2011. Manufacturing 
has also increased its share to about 6% in 
2011, largely in the domain of food processing (AEO, 2013).
AfDB states that flows of Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) exceeded USD 1 billion 
(bn) in 2011 and remained high in 2012 at 
about USD 830m. Much of the investment 
was in the mining and oil sectors. 
Over the past two decades, Niger’s social 
indicators have improved noticeably. The 
gross primary school enrolment rate has 
increased from about 29% in the early 
1990s to 76% in 2011. The ratio of girls to 
boys in primary schools also increased 
from 25% to 40% during the same period, 
and further improvements are expected. 
The mortality rate for children under five 
has fallen from 320 to 130 per thousand in 
1990-2010 (World Bank, 2013b). However, 
major challenges remain, as all development indicators point to very low human 
and economic development according to the United Nations Development 
Programme (United Nations Development 
Programme UNDP, 2013). Niger is currently 
ranked 186th on the Human Development 
Index (HDI). Nearly 76% of the population 
lives on less than two dollars a day and is 
experiencing extreme poverty. Improving 
living conditions in Niger will therefore 
remain at the forefront of the country’s 
growth agenda. 
The government of Niger’s new poverty 
reduction strategy — its Plan for Economic 
and Social Development (PDES) — is the 
country’s overarching development framework according to the Ministry of Planning, 
Lands and Community Development (MP/
AT-DC, 2011). The principal focus of the 
PDES is to achieve economic growth of 
about 8% in 2012-2015. It identifies 86 
programmes needed to reach 11 strategic 
objectives. The programmes are clustered 
into five areas: 
A village school in Niger 
Source: Wikimedia(i) strengthening the credibility and effectiveness of public institutions 
(ii) creating the conditions for sustainable, 
balanced and inclusive development 
(iii) providing food security and sustainable agricultural development 
(iv) promoting a competitive and diverse 
economy for accelerated and inclusive 
growth 
(v) fostering social development. 
The PDES acknowledges the central role 
energy services will play in reaching social 
development goals and raising income 
generation. This is required for individual 
development and community transformation. It therefore channels energy access 
into short and long-term development 
objectives. It also suggests specific plans 
for modernising the electricity supply 
infrastructure, improving coverage levels, 
reforming the existing regulatory framework and increasing the contribution of 
renewable energy to energy security.

#Role of energy in development in Niger
Fulfilling the vision outlined in the PDES 
depends on the ability of Niger to scale up 
and improve the quality of energy services. 
This means putting in place good policies, creating the enabling environment 
for energy investment and building strong 
institutions that can deliver good outcomes. 
The per capita electricity consumption 
was less than 50 kWh in 2012 against an 
African average of over 575 kWh and a 
global average of over 2770 kWh. This 
makes the average Nigerien citizen among 
the lowest consumers of electricity in the 
world. Moreover, about 76% of the population does not have access to electricity, 
much of which is restricted to urban areas. 
This indicates significant pent-up demand 
in the power sector and a need to close the 
gap between demand and availability. 
Niger’s energy profile is typical of a lowincome economy in that the household 
sector remains the main energy user. This 
signifies a limited use of energy in the 
productive sector. Households across Niger 
rely heavily on traditional biomass to meet 
their basic energy needs. However, during 
the last couple of years LPG consumption 
has experienced major growth. 
Niger is endowed with significant renewable energy resources and has the potential 
to develop a diversified portfolio of renewable energy technologies. With improvements in technologies and costs, potential 
renewable energy is well suited to both 
urban and rural applications. Although 
Niger’s recent discovery of oil and gas will 
provide much-needed relief from the country’s energy security problems and endless 
difficulties maintaining a healthy balance 
of trade in the short term, renewables are 
also likely to feature as an important longterm platform for closing the electricity 
access gap, especially in rural settlements. 
Several strategies such as Programme 
National de Reference d’Acces aux Services 
Energétiques –PRASE - National Reference 
Programme on Access to Energy Services, 
have outlined the important role of renewable energy in delivering energy services. 
Over the past five years this programme 
has increased the installed capacity of 
decentralised solar systems for a wide 
range of end uses by about 1 MW. 
Niger’s future development will largely 
be determined by whether it exploits the 
range of energy resources it has to good 
effect. The country still has some way to go in addressing a number of social development problems in education, health 
and water services. Energy services will 
continue to play a major role in resolving 
them. The government of Niger has long 
recognised that lack of energy access seriously handicaps development, and efforts 
to remedy this problem need to be scaled 
up. Indeed, in many of these successful 
cases elsewhere, energy intervention in the 
social and economic sectors namely health, 
water, agriculture and education was made 
as part of a comprehensive development 
strategy. These two aims are not mutually exclusive but intertwined. For Niger, 
increasing electricity access and making 
a transition from inefficient biomass use 
is not only about having the resources 
available. It will require sound policies, an 
effective regulatory framework, robust and 
dynamic institutions and sustained capacity development programmes. 

#The Renewables Readiness Assessment (RRA)process in Niger

A senior officer at the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Energy (MoEP) with a thorough knowledge and experience in renewables was the 
RRA focal point in Niger. 
Following preparations by the national 
consultant and MoEP, a representative 
from the ECOWAS Centre for Renewable 
Energy and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) 
wrote to identified key institutions selected 
to be part of the technical/expert team. 
They were invited to the formal launch 
of the RRA at a kick-off meeting on in 
July 2012 where they were divided into 
three thematic subgroups. The subgroups 
met in August 2012 respectively, having 
had time to go through the background 
note prepared by the national consultant 
(ETIC-Sarl) in advance of their scheduled 
meetings. 
The subgroups reviewed the tentative list 
resource-service pairs suggested by MoEP 
after discussions with the national consultant to be further analysed and discussed. A 
national workshop held in September 2012 
prioritised five manageable short- to medium-term priority resource-service pairs. 
The workshop also identified and recommended a set of seven concrete action 
points to resolve limited systemic, institutional and individual capacity constraints. 
Resolving these will create good synergies and have a positive cumulative effect 
on the country’s readiness to scale up RE 
deployment. 
This report is structured in five substantive 
sections. Section 1 presents the introduction covering country background and a 
brief on the RRA process in Niger. Section 2 
presents the renewable and general energy 
context in the region. It includes an overview of the energy sector in Niger, its challenges and an overview of RE potential and 
use. It also provides a detailed discussion 
of the electricity sector. Section 3 explores 
Niger’s energy institutions and the policy 
and regulatory framework as well as the 
conditions of financing and investment in 
the country. Section 4 presents the emerging concerns relating to solar/wind electricity (on-grid), a range of decentralised (offgrid) applications as well as the biomass 
sector. Opportunities and constraints that 
affect deployment scale-up are discussed 
along with the RRA findings. Section 5 
presents the recommended action necessary for scaling up RE in Niger. Annex I 
presents a detailed account of the recommended action identified by the RRA. 

#II. ENERGY CONTEXT
#Regional context
The total population of the ECOWAS region in 2011 was about 309 million 
and growing at an annual rate of about 2.6% according to the United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO, 
2012). Per capita GDP remains low by world levels at USD 983, but the 
range within countries in the region is at USD 245-3171. Real GDP growth 
has for the most part remained strong over the past decade. It reached 
6.9% in 2012 due to good rainfall and positive developments in the mining 
and petroleum sectors (ECOWAS, 2013). 
The energy system in West Africa is faced with a number of interrelated 
challenges: low energy access, insecure energy supply and growing environmental degradation. Total Primary Energy Consumption (TPES) in the 
region is about 155 million tonnes of oil equivalent (MTOE) p.a. (ECREEE, 
2012). Fuelwood and charcoal account for the largest sources of energy, 
representing 77% of primary energy consumption. Petroleum products in 
2012 accounted for 22 M TOE of consumption, and as a whole the region 
consumes about 43 terawatt-hours (TWh) of electricity (ibid). Sustained 
economic growth seen in the past few years has been accompanied by 
growing demand for a modernised energy infrastructure. This is creating 
pressure on governments to improve energy production to meet growing 
consumption. 
Access to electricity in the ECOWAS region is low at 42%. Over 75% of 
those with access live in urban areas, leaving some 77% with no access to 
electricity (ECREEE, 2012). There are variations between countries. Some 
are doing better than others at providing electricity for their populations. 
These include Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire, Cape Verde, Senegal and Nigeria. 
Unmet electricity demand amounted to around 7-10 TWh in 2006-2010 
(ECREEE, 2012).
The electricity systems in West Africa also face challenges arising from 
existing supply capacities unable to satisfy growing demand. Furthermore, 
the region faces the difficulty of raising sufficient funds internally or 
attracting outside investors willing to incur the high perceived risk of the 
electricity sector in the region (IRENA, 2013a). Overall, unreliable power holds back the region's enterprises and has 
a negative impact on productive activities. 
Transmission and distribution losses are 
around 40%, increasing electricity tariffs 
significantly. A number of countries in the 
region have some of the highest tariffs in 
the world with a regional average exceeding USD 0.20/kWh. The cost of providing 
backup power (typically USD 0.30-0.40/
kWh) handicaps productive industries. 
Eberhard, et al. (2011) estimate that blackouts reduce annual economic growth in 
Africa by about 2%. 
Concerns regarding energy access 
and security are not new in the region. 
Following the adoption of the first ECOWAS 
energy policy in 1982, the region has been 
engaged in developing an integrated 
approach for the energy sector. The aim 
is to provide better access to modernised 
energy services. Several initiatives have 
been made with that in mind and some of 
these are discussed below. 
The West African Power Pool (WAPP) was 
established in 1999. Its objective was to 
curtail the power deficit in the region by 
integrating the operations of national power 
systems into a unified regional electricity 
market (cross-border trade flows). This is 
intended to facilitate stable, reliable and 
cost-competitive electricity to all ECOWAS 
citizens in the medium to long term. In 
2006, the WAPP secretariat was created 
and mandated to ensure the promotion 
and development of power generation and 
transmission facilities (www.ecowapp.org). 
The Energy Protocol was adopted in 2003 
by ECOWAS member countries. This is a 
legal framework aimed at promoting longterm cooperation in the energy field. It is 
based on complementary relationships 
and mutual benefit to increase investment 
in the energy sector and develop energy 
trade in the region.
ECOWAS/West African Economic and 
Monetary Union (UEMOA) White Paper 
for a Regional Policy on Access to Energy 
Services to Rural and Semi-Urban Areas 
was adopted in 2006. Three targets were 
set for 2015: 
i) 100% of the total population, or 
325 million people, to have access to 
improved cooking fuels and stoves, 
including 9.2% to LPG cooking devices 
ii) at least 60% of people in rural areas 
to have access to productive energy 
services in villages, especially motive 
power, to boost productivity 
iii) 66% of the population, or 214 million 
people, to have access to individual 
electricity supply (ECOWAS, 2006).
The Regulatory Authority for Regional 
Electricity Sector of ECOWAS (ERERA) 
was created in 2008. Its aim was to ensure 
the regulation of cross-border exchanges 
in electricity and provide substantial 
support for national electricity regulators 
of member states (www.erera.arrec.org).
The ECOWAS Centre for Renewable Energy 
and Energy Efficiency (ECREEE) was established by the Council of ECOWAS in 2009. 
Its mandate was to promote measures to 
improve access to modern energy services, 
increase energy security and reduce 
adverse impacts on the environment. The 
creation of favourable framework conditions and an enabling environment for 
renewable energy and energy efficiency 
are viewed as tools to achieve these goals.
Much effort will be required to address the 
energy issues in the region and capitalise 
on the opportunities that clearly lie ahead. 
ECREEE developed and adopted the 
ECOWAS Renewable Energy Policy (EREP) 
in November 2012. EREP is designed to make renewable energy a vector for 
universal access to electricity by 2030. It 
is also intended to ensure a more secure 
and sustainable supply of domestic energy 
for cooking. This will meet the objectives 
of the ECOWAS White Paper for access to 
modernised energy services by 2020.


#WEST AFRICAN POWER POOL
WAPP is looking at developing a regional 
electricity market through successive 
phases:
Phase 1 will last from 2012 to around 2015, 
when most regional transmission infrastructure is expected to be commissioned. 
This phase includes formalising trading arrangements, agreeing transmission 
pricing and strengthening the role of the 
regional regulator.
Phase 2 - based on the preparations carried 
out during Phase 1, should include bilateral 
agreements on transit through third countries, short-term exchanges through dayahead markets, regional transmission pricing and regional system operator/market 
operator functions.
Phase 3 - a long-term vision, which includes 
regional optimisation of operations. WAPP 
has approved a regional master plan for 
infrastructure development with timings 
for the different projects. This master plan 
is organised around 30 generation and 
26 transmission priority projects with the 
objective of developing 10% renewable 
energy (excluding large hydro). 
The implementation of the master plan will 
add an additional capacity of 10,000 MW 
and 16,000 km of transmission lines in the 
region. This would consist of an electricity mix of 21 hydropower plants, five thermal power plants and four wind and solar 
plants (Figure 1).
From a purely economic standpoint, a 
number of countries would benefit from 
the opportunity to reduce costs they incur 
at present by importing more than half 
their power. Savings for countries such 
as Guinea Bissau, Liberia and Niger could 
amount to USD 0.050-08/kWh (Eberhard, 
et al., 2011). The largest beneficiaries of 
regional trade would be smaller nations 
that lack domestic hydropower resources. 
For these countries, it is estimated that 
the cost savings generated by regional 
trade could repay the required investment 
in cross-border transmission in less than a 
year. This depends on neighbouring countries developing sufficient surplus power to 
export. 
In cooperation with ECREEE and the 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
(IAEA), IRENA has created an energy 
system modelling tool for West African 
countries called energy system that meets 
various system requirements including 
reliability. At the same time, it takes into 
account the optimal economic configurations (including both investment and operation costs) of the system to meet daily 
and/or seasonally fluctuating demand. 
Using EREP, IRENA developed a transition 
scenario for the renewable power sector 
in ECOWAS countries. This shows that the 
share of renewable technologies in the 
region could increase from 22% of electricity generation at present to as much as 
52% in 2030 (IRENA, 2013a).
More specifically, IRENA assessed the 
investment needed in addition to funds 
already committed to the present power 
supply infrastructure. This investment 
would mean integrating renewable technology generation into the grid, including 
off-grid power systems when technologically and economically feasible. Niger has 
long benefited from cross-border electricity exchange with Nigeria, obtaining electricity at low cost. On occasions, the 
negative aspects of its overdependence on 
Nigeria becomes clear when power interruptions occur due to technical problems. 
This draws attention to the vulnerability of 
Niger’s power sector. Niger would participate in both the generation and transmission priority projects in the region. Two 
power generation projects are planned 
that will feed into WAPP. These include 
a 400 MW coal-fired power plant due to 
come on stream by 2019 and a 500 MW 
gas-fired plant that will use the country’s 
newly discovered natural gas. The power 
generated from these plants will be channelled through the WAPP 330 kilovolt (kV) 
Nigeria-Niger interconnector. This also 
connects Burkina Faso via its left branch 
and Benin and Togo via its right.

#Energy supply and demand in Niger
Like all ECOWAS countries, Niger has a 
dual energy system containing co-existing 
traditional and modernised energy systems 
and practices. On the one hand, traditional 
biomass fuels and inefficient technologies 
dominate household energy needs. On the 
other, electricity and more refined fuels are 
also used in Niger as well as up-to-date 
appliances. However, these are mainly used 
in urban areas, where the energy picture is 
complex. The simultaneous use of biomass 
fuels, kerosene or LPG is common in urban 
areas, even in relatively high-income 
households. The fragmented nature of the 
energy system creates enormous difficulties for policy makers to overcome the 
energy challenge in an integrated manner
TPES in Niger was about 91 petajoules [PJ] 
(2173 thousand tonnes of oil equivalent) in 
2010. As shown in figure 2, the most striking feature of Niger’s energy system is the 
dominance of biomass. This represents 
79% of total consumption and meets 83% 
of household energy needs. Biomass in the 
form of fuelwood, charcoal and agricultural 
residues is used in inefficient cooking appliances. This practice has contributed to the 
ongoing deforestation problems in Niger. 
Mainly used for electricity generation and 
transport, petroleum products account for 
18% of Niger’s energy mix. Their share of the 
total has increased in recent years. Mineral 
coal for electricity generation accounts for 
the remaining balance at 3% of total energy 
supplies in Niger. The share of renewables 
as a proportion of TPES remains negligible 
at less than 1%, assuming that all biomass is 
non-renewable - which is not the case. 
The household sector is the main enduser of energy in Niger at 90%, followed 
by transport and industry at 8% and 2% 
respectively (see figure 3). This energy 
consumption profile is typical of least developed country economic structures. These 
countries have limited industrialisation. 
Furthermore, energy needs for the residential sector are met by traditional biomass, 
although more recently LPG has come to 
assume greater importance in the household energy supply mix. Energy consumption in the agricultural and commercial 
sectors remains small – less than 0.5%. 
Until recently, Niger imported oil and gas 
needed for domestic consumption, creating balance of trade difficulties for the 
country’s policy makers. However, since 
2011 Niger has become an oil producer, 
improving the prospect for social and 
economic development. The Agadem 
perimeter, entrusted to NCPC, has proven 
oil reserves estimated at nearly one billion 
barrels while its natural gas reserves are 
estimated at 30 bn cubic metres (m3). At 
present, Niger has the capacity to produce 
100,000 barrels per day but currently 
produces 20,000 barrels per day. This is 
earmarked to meet domestic demand for 
petroleum products. In 2011, a refinery with a capacity of 20,000 barrels per day was 
built in Zinder to supply Niger’s current and 
future needs. Given that Niger’s present 
demand stands at 8,000 barrels per day, 
some of the surplus petroleum products 
from Zinder are already finding markets in 
neighbouring countries, including northern 
Nigeria. 
Moreover, the associated gas is tapped 
as part of the government’s ambitious 
campaign to promote LPG as an alternative to wood and charcoal consumption in Niamey and other urban centres. 
The campaign has delivered positive 
results, with consumption increasing from 
3,000 metric tons (t) in 2011 to 10,000 t 
in 2012 (Practical Action Consulting, 2013). 
LPG production has reached 47,000 t p.a 
and is expected to amount to 70,000 t p.a. 
once the refinery reaches its maximum 
capacity. This will provide further opportunities for mainstreaming LPG use across 
the country, including in rural households 
and businesses. Conditions in Niger for 
this increased use of LPG are favourable 
as LPG costs are the lowest in the region. 
They amount to USD 0.6 per kilogramme 
(kg), which is a significant reduction in cost 
compared to USD 1/kg before the refinery 
was built.
Other options have received attention. Niger is endowed with proven 
coal reserves amounting to more than 
68m t in Salkadamna (Tahoua) with a 
calorific value of 6,000 kcal/kg and over 
20 t in Anou-Araren and Solomi (Agadez). 
At present, only the Anou-Araren deposit 
is mined. It feeds a power generation 
plant for mines in the region, as well as 
the cities of Agadez, Akokan, Arlit and 
Tchirozerine. Proven uranium reserves in 
Niger are estimated at over 280,000 t. 
The mines are operated by Société Miniere 
d’Air – Air Mining Company (SOMAIR) and 
Compagnie Minière d’Akouta – Akouta 
Mining Company (COMINAK). Their annual 
production increased from approximately 
2,900 t at the end of the 1990s to an annual 
average of 4,000 t in 2005. All uranium 
produced in Niger is exported, although 
there are ambitions to use it to generate 
electricity for the ECOWAS region. The 
first phase of development of a regional 
nuclear programme is in progress and has 
the assistance of the IAEA.
Energy access in Niger remains a critical barrier to the country’s development. 
Modest improvements have been experienced in recent years. However, electricity 
access in Niger remains low at about 24% 
and almost all the population relies on the 
unsustainable use of traditional biomass 
(MP/AT-DC, 2011). Moreover, there is a 
major disparity between rural and urban 
areas in terms of access to modernised 
energy services (both electricity and heat 
for cooking). Urban areas enjoy significantly better conditions for access. The 
following section provides a review of the 
state of the power sector in Niger, including 
the tariff structure and planned expansion.


#Electricity system
The institutional arrangement of Niger 
electricity sector is depicted in figure 4. 
The Ministry of Energy and Petroleum is 
responsible for policy development and 
the Multisectoral Regulatory Authority is 
the independent regulator. The Société 
Nigérienne d'Electricité - NIGELEC - the 
Nigerien Electricity Company, is the utility responsible for electric power generation, transmission and distribution in Niger. 
Established in 1968, NIGELEC is majority owned by the government of Niger. 
Petroleum products (70%) dominate 
Niger’s energy generation mix, followed 
by coal (28%) and solar (2%). As shown 
in table 1, the national installed capacity 
of less than 175 MW includes the NIGELEC 
83 MW thermal power station. It also 
includes a 36 MW coal-fired power plant 
run by the Nigerien Anou Araren Coal 
Company (SONICHAR) and the AGGREKO 
15 MW thermal power plant. Furthermore, 
the two Independent Power Producers 
(IPPs) SORAZ (a refinery) and SOMINA (a 
uranium mining company) produce 23 MW 
and 15 MW respectively to meet their electricity needs (Figure 4). Installed PV capacity amounts to about 4 MW and meets a 
variety of end uses. Approximately 47% 
of the electricity produced is consumed 
by households. Industry uses around 39%, 
commercial entities and services 13% and 
agroprocessing 1% (Oumarou, 2012).
Niger does not generate sufficient electricity to meet the growing need for power 
from its population of 16 million. It has historically relied on imported power from 
Nigeria following an agreement in 1977, 
and this provides 80-90% of its national 
electricity requirements. Niger’s dependence on imported power is illustrated in 
figure 5. The preferential rate of electricity from Nigeria at USD 0.04/kWh partly 
explains this continued trend. It amounts 
to a 50% subsidy for every unit of power 
imported (Eberhard, et al., 2011), as 
consumers in Nigeria purchase electricity at 
USD 0.08/kWh. This agreement is therefore not certain to last and it leaves Niger 
vulnerable to any tariff adjustments made 
by Nigerian authorities. The heavy reliance 
on Nigeria for electricity can potentially 
undermine the resilience of Niger’s energy 
system, as in 2008 and 2010. Erratic power 
supplies from Nigeria prompted Niger’s 
government to gradually reduce its reliance 
on Nigeria by purchasing new diesel-powered generators. However, these interventions appear to be emergency responses 
driven by necessity to act rather than part 
of a longer-term strategy of energy selfreliance. 


#Transmission and distribution
The electrical transmission network in 
Niger is divided into five zones (Figure 6). 
These consist of: 
i) the River Zone fed by the 132 kV 
interconnection line from BirninKebbi 
(Nigeria) to Niamey (Niger) with a 
contractual power of 120 MW 
ii) the Niger Centre East (NCE) Zone 
which brings together the regions of 
Zinder, Maradi and Tahoua, powered 
by the 132 kV interconnection line from 
Katsina (Nigeria) to Gazaoua (Niger) 
with a power contract of 60 MW with 
Nigeria 
iii) the Northern Zone which includes the 
towns of Agadez, Arlit and Tchirozerine, 
as well as mining companies, fed from 
the SONICHAR coal plant and a central 
thermal diesel in Agadez with an 
installed capacity of 37 MW 
iv) the Diffa Zone connected to the 33 kV 
Nigerian network from Damasak with 
a capacity of 5 MW and installed thermal diesel production of 2.3 MW 
v) the Gaya/Malanville Zone, which is fed 
by a 33 kV interconnection from Kamba 
in Nigeria and has contracted power of 
7 MW with Nigeria. 
The cost of the transmission infrastructure can be significant, ranging from 
USD 120,000/km for 132 kV power 
lines to USD 17,000/km for 20 kV lines. 
Distribution costs amount to USD 20,000/
km. Transmission and distribution losses 
in Niger are lower than the African average, having been brought down from 27% 
in 2005 to about 17% now. However, they 
still remain higher than the European average (6%). Given that a significant proportion of Niger’s population lives far from 
gridlines, electricity from the grid alone 
will not deliver the promise of universal 
access. It is important that there is a meaningful dialogue on the genuine prospect of 
decentralised systems as a complementary 
solution to energy access in Niger. 
Power distribution works through medium 
voltage 33 kV and 20 kV cables as well as 
low voltage cables to connect subscribers. Electricity supply in Niger also faces 
frequent blackouts due to limited power 
infrastructure. In 2009, for instance, there 
were some 21 outages a month compared 
to an average of 11 outages for sub-Saharan Africa (Eberhard et al., 2011). Power 
outages in Niger were shorter at two hours 
against six hours for the region. Outages are 
frequent during the dry season (FebruaryMay) when demand is high and power reliability can fall up to 13% as was the case in 
2010. Over 40% of Nigerien firms reported 
that power shortages were a major obstacle to administration and good economic 
performance. They also reported that 6% 
of annual turnover was lost due to electricity shortages (World Bank, 2009). This has 
prompted 20% of Nigerien firms to acquire 
their own generators (World Bank, 2010). 
A growing number of urban households 
are also purchasing their own gensets as a 
backup power source. 
As shown in figure 5, power demand in Niger 
has risen by about 50% in 2005-2010. This 
trend is expected to increase as the ambitious PDES calls for broadening electricity 
access to improve livelihoods and deliver 
the economic growth trajectory of 8% p.a. 
Projected demand shows that Niger will 
need to scale up its efforts to boost domestic production as well as rely on imports 
from Nigeria and WAPP (Figure 7). As part 
of this endeavour, Niger is actively pursuing wholesale power generation and transmission improvement projects. These will 
develop its own domestic power sources, 
particularly hydropower, other renewables 
and the oil and gas sector (Table 2).
The electricity sector was reformed in 2003. 
One important change was the adoption of 
the Electricity Code in 2004. The terms of 
the code paved the way for IPPs, breaking 
up the monopoly NIGELEC had enjoyed 
for electricity generation, transmission 
and distribution since its establishment. 
However, IPPs were still required to sell 
their surpluses through NIGELEC, which 
remained responsible for transmission and 
distribution. This new arrangement treats 
SONICHAR as an IPP. It sells electricity 
directly to mining companies in northern 
Niger as well as to NIGELEC for distribution in the cities of Agadez, Arlit, Akokan 
and Tchirozérine. To date, the number of 
registered IPPs remains limited, and the 
few that have emerged use conventional 
energy sources to generate electricity. 
The government of Niger, with the assistance of the World Bank, is currently working on an electricity master plan with a 
view to providing an integrated strategy for 
the sector’s future development. Intensive 
stakeholder consultation is taking place 
with participation from key representatives 
from government, business and civil society to feed into the strategy. 


#Costs and tariffs
Electricity tariffs remain in the hands of 
the government, and are set by decree, as 
in a number of other West African countries (figure 8). The tariff set depends on 
a number of factors, such as the electricity 
production cost (including operation cost), 
social cost and other political and economic 
criteria. There are three categories of 
production costs in Niger. They consist 
of the NIGELEC domestic power plants 
(USD 0.22/kWh), coal-fired plants 
(USD 0.12/kWh) and electricity imports 
from Nigeria (USD 0.04/kWh). The utility purchases tax-free domestically-produced diesel directly from the refinery at 
USD 0.70 per litre. The country does not 
currently export crude oil. However, sale of 
diesel to the utility at the subsidised price 
is an opportunity cost if crude oil had been 
sold at international market prices. It is 
important to note that Niger will continue 
to remain dependent on cheap electricity 
from Nigeria unless there is a price review.
Furthermore, in 2012 the government 
accepted the creation of a social tariff 
as part its energy access improvement 
efforts. This supports low income and 
low consumption subscribers. This category of households (3 kWh) is charged 
USD 0.11/kWh for the first 50 kWh 
consumed. There are also plans to reduce 
the costs of electrical connections to the 
poor. These stand at USD 102 for 3kW and 
USD 144 for 6 kW. Concessionary rates also 
apply for industries and agricultural facilities for water pumping. These tariffs are 
fixed at USD 0.11/kWh and USD 0.07/kWh respectively. These lower tariff rates are set 
in order to reach the government’s social 
and economic goals, which require affordable and reliable energy services. 
Power sector reforms in 2004 were 
supposed to contribute to the recovery 
of costs and performance improvements 
in Niger. However, at USD 0.158/kWh, 
Niger’s consumers pay approximately 
USD 0.07/kWh more than citizens in the 
average African country that rely heavily 
on thermal power systems (Eberhard, et 
al., 2011). However, tariffs are lower than 
in some countries in the subregion such 
as Burkina Faso, Benin (USD 0.20/kWh) 
and Senegal (USD 0.24/kWh). These tariffs 
therefore do not allow the utility to recover 
costs incurred from the sale of power. 
Indeed in 2011, for example, revenues from 
power sales amounted to USD 90.5m (with 
a recovery rate of 102%) against operating expenses of USD 100m. This clearly 
demonstrates that present tariff structures 
do not reflect costs. 
The overwhelming majority of those who 
remain unserved by the grid live in villages 
very far away from national grid lines. 
The cost of transmission lines to these 
communities with low electricity demand 
could amount to USD 20,000-120,000/
km, which in many cases is not financially 
viable. Furthermore, grid connection fees 
cost USD 102-145 in Niger. This is far too 
expensive for low-income households without appropriate financial support. Niger 
needs substantial investments in system 
modernisation, but more importantly, in 
new generation plants, as well as transmission and distribution facilities. 
A parallel strategy will be important to 
meet the needs of remote communities 
that use little energy. Niger has considerable conventional and renewable energy resource potential.

It therefore has the 
opportunity to create a more cost-effective 
grid and off-grid renewable energy supply 
system. This can play a major role in reducing dependency on imported power and 
increasing access to energy services. The 
practical solutions may appear obvious, 
but Niger will need to develop the policy 
framework and incentives to accommodate 
new business models and new domestic 
and external energy investment. 


#Renewable energy resource potential and use
The energy sector in Niger faces some 
formidable challenges and new opportunities. Its resource constraints in the energy 
sector have undermined economic and 
social development goals. Rural communities face a particular challenge. Widespread 
poverty, low incomes, limited scope for 
moving beyond subsistence activities and 
the inherent disadvantage of the grid’s 
remoteness create structural obstacles 
to rural development. Niger’s untapped 
renewable energy potential provides 
opportunities for transforming urban and 
rural livelihoods. 
Given its geographic and climatic conditions, Niger could develop a diverse portfolio of renewable energy technologies. 
Niger has an excellent renewable energy 
resource profile. There are considerable 
solar energy resources and a moderate 
wind regime for electricity and mechanical 
power towards the North. There is modest 
hydro and biomass potential towards the 
South. A summary of the resource and 
potential for Niger is outlined below.


#Hydropower resources
Hydropower potential in Niger is estimated 
at about 400 MW (ECOWAS, 2006) and is 
only partially developed. Three potential 
medium and large hydropower sites along 
the river Niger and its tributaries have been 
identified. They would have a combined 
capacity of 268.5 MW and include: 
•	 Kandadji Dam, a large multipurpose
dam with a capacity of 130 MW (4 X 
32.5 MW) and estimated annual generation rate of about 630 GWh. This high 
profile dam project will generate hydropower and regulate the flow of the 
river Niger, retaining water during the dry season and supporting irrigation 
initiatives downstream. Construction 
has started and is expected to be 
completed by 2017. 
•	 Hydropower at Gambou and
Dyodyonga, which could generate 
about 112.5 MW and 26 MW respectively, according to feasibility studies.
A number of mini-hydro sites have also 
been identified along the four tributaries 
of the Niger River (Mekrou, Tapoa, Gorouol 
and Sirba), amounting to a combined 
capacity of 8 MW. These will not require 
dams and will be quicker to install. They will 
have the strategic advantage of generating 
electricity close to consumption areas thus 
limiting costly power lines. Before moving 
ahead, further data need to be collected 
and analysed to ensure their potential and 
viability. 


#Solar energy resources
Niger enjoys high solar radiation conditions 
in all eight of its regions. Average solar radiation is 5-7 kWh/m2 per day (figure 9), and 
there are seven to ten hours of sunshine 
per day on average. April to August is the 
period of high insolation, when the diurnal 
variation between minimum and maximum 
radiation values is small. 
The lowest radiation values are observed in 
December and January. The rainy season 
coincides with the high solar radiation 
summer months. Although solar radiation 
levels are high in all four meteorological 
stations, there appears higher variability 
over the year in cities of Arlit and Agadez 
located in the northern and central regions 
respectively. Niamey and Zinder, located at 
lower latitudes, show less variability across 
the year, hence making them excellent 
locations for harnessing solar energy. 
There is a long history of solar energy 
use in Niger. This began in the mid-1960s 
when the Centre National d'Énergie Solaire 
(National Solar Energy Centre; CNES) was 
established. Previously known as the Office 
de l’Energie Solaire (Solar Energy Office; 
ONERSOL), it had been set up to under take applied research on renewable energy 
and provide diagnostic studies on the use 
of renewable energy technologies for various sectors of the economy. It was also 
established to run training programmes in 
renewable energy systems. As part of this 
initiative, a factory was set up to assemble 
and produce various types of solar equipment that were distributed locally with 
strong government support. 
Solar energy applications in use in Niger at 
present include PV for mini-grid and standalone applications, solar crop dryers and 
solar water heating for homes and community applications. 
This programme continued with some 
force until the mid-1970s. However, it failed 
to maintain its promise due to high production costs, poor management and product 
quality control as well as its inability to 
compete against cheaper and better quality imports. Solar PV and other solar energy 
technologies continued to be promoted in 
Niger through various outlets, including 
the national school television programme. 
Solar technology installation also continued, largely in PV pumping areas and 
through education and health infrastructure electrification. 
During the 1980s and 1990s, a two-phased 
Special Energy Programme was initiated by 
the Niger-German technical cooperation. 
Through ground-level projects, it popularised and promoted various renewable technologies such as PV systems, biodigesters 
and solar water heaters. Other smaller 
scale donor programmes also started up. 
However, much of this effort remained 
driven by donors with little national acceptance and did not lead to the development 
of a lasting renewables market in Niger. 
At present, there is little in the way of 
private sector participation and incentives to draw investors in the development 
and distribution of solar products in Niger. 
There are a few private sector players such 
as SunTotal and YASMA who dominate 
the national market, while policies have 
yet to excite wider commercial interest. 
Moreover, the market is limited by its small 
size. It is also partly constrained by taxes of 
over 52% (import tariffs and VAT), a lack of 
regulation on poor quality products smuggled from neighbouring countries, and 
the absence of a meaningful government 
renewables stimulus.
Still, in 2012 total installed PV capacity 
was over 4 MW (see figure 11), and there 
are some good examples worth scaling up. 
With financial assistance from the government of India, the villages of Moli Haoussa 
(commune rurale de Tamou) and Banigueti 
(commune de Torodi) have been electrified by solar PV. Moreover, a large rural 
PV electrification project is in progress 
in the Dosso and Tillabery region costing 
nearly USD 15m to meet basic services for 
about 150 villages. What makes this project 
interesting is that it is being co-financed 
by the ECOWAS Development Bank. This 
demonstrates that regional development 
banks are interested in renewable energy 
development. 
There is growing investment interest in 
PV grid connection as the falling cost of 
PV in recent years brings the technology 
closer to grid parity in many parts of the 
world. Niger’s high electricity generation 
cost is likely to provoke investor interest in introducing PV to the grid. The 
government of Niger is negotiating a PPA 
for a 20 MW solar plant with a French 
company. However, this project is facing 
opposition due to the proposed price of 
USD 0.165/kWh, which is significantly 
higher than imports from Nigeria but lower 
than the utility domestic generation costs.
With regards to other solar energy technologies, solar water heaters are used in 
Niger in some schools, clinics and households. The country also has domesticallyproduced water heaters and solar dryers 
that are cheaper than imported systems, 
but their quality is often of lower standard. 


#Wind energy resourceS
A wind energy resource study was 
conducted in the 1990s by the University 
of Waterloo (Canada) and the Institut 
National de Recherche Agronomique du 
Niger (INRAN), the National Institute for 
Agronomy Research. The study concluded 
that average wind speeds of 2-6 metres per 
second (m/s) are obtained at a height of 
10 metres, but wind speeds at hub height 
(e.g., 50 metres) are usually 20-100% 
higher, warranting further investigation. 
Wind speed is moderate in the southeast 
of the country at less than 4 m/s, but rises 
to an average of over 5 m/s towards the 
northern part of the country (Figure 12). 
Wind regimes are very site-specific, requiring detailed site studies. However, it is 
clear that the relatively high wind speed in 
some parts of the country means electricity production makes sense. The problem 
is that the high investment cost is not justified because many of these parts of Niger 
are uninhabited or sparsely populated and 
lack electricity infrastructure. However, 
further studies may identify favourable 
sites in the more populated parts of the 
south and southeast. For example, the 
general wind regime in Zinder, provided 
in figure 13, gives cause for conducting 
further evaluation. 
There is no experience of wind energy projects in Niger. Much of the limited experience is restricted to rural water pumping 
projects. There are at present about 30 
small-scale wind pumping installations, 
which are installed by donor funding and 
to a lesser extent community financing. 


#Biomass resources
Niger lacks adequate information on forest 
cover and biomass potential. Much of the 
data are either dated or fragmented, covering isolated mountain areas or river basins. 
Estimates by the Food and Agriculture 
Organisation (FAO), however, indicate a 
forest inventory of 16 million hectares (ha) 
or about 2% of the country’s land area. 
Within this total, 600,000 ha accounts 
for natural forests, 4.4m ha for converted 
forest and 11m ha for marginal forest land 
(less than 5% forest cover). Woody biomass 
productivity is estimated at 0.1-1.5 m3/ha 
per annum. 
Given the dominance of energy biomass 
in Niger, often freely harvested from 
surrounding areas, only a portion of the 
forest capital can be regarded today as 
renewable. The pace of wood harvesting 
has long exceeded the replenishment rate. 
It is estimated that about 3m t of wood 
and agricultural residues are consumed 
domestically every year (Government of 
Niger, UNDP and Food and Agricultural 
Organisation (FAO), 2003). This trend 
shows a steady decrease in supply to meet 
a growing demand for wood energy. Other 
biomass energy resources are used in 
Niger too. Agricultural residues are widely 
used by rural households for livestock and 
energy purposes. This sometimes harms 
soil fertility as bio resources are diverted 
from agricultural land to meet energy 
needs. Nevertheless, the potential of agricultural residues to meet energy services 
can be significant, mainly in southern areas 
(Table 3). The production of biogas by 
anaerobic fermentation of agricultural and 
animal biomass (anaerobic digestion) has 
also been used in Niger, but no numbers 
have been recorded. Digesters require a 
large amount of water, which may limit the 
benefit of their widespread use in Niger or 
other Sahelian countries. 



#III. ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY

#Key energy stakeholders and institutional structures
The energy sector in Niger contains a multitude of stakeholders, which 
include government bodies and parastatal organisations, NGOs and associations as well as the private sector. Some of these play multiple roles in 
policy, regulation, finance, knowledge generation and advocacy. 
Ministère de l’Energie et du Pétrole – MoEP, the Ministry of Energy 
and Petroleum, is in charge of the development, monitoring and implementation of the national energy policy in accordance with the guidelines set by the government. Within the ministry, Direction des Energies 
Renouvelable set Energies Domestiques – DERED, the Renewable and 
Domestic Energy Directorate, is tasked with the responsibility for renewable energy and household energy. It distributes and installs energy 
systems across the country to serve the needs of households. The ministry also oversees the work of various independent bodies, described 
below. 
Under the supervision of the Office of the Prime Minister, Conseil National 
del’ Environnement pour un Development Durable – CNEDD, National 
Council of the Environment for Sustainable Development,is composed 
of representatives of the government and civil society. It has a wide 
remit, coordinating and monitoring policy concerning the environment 
and sustainable development. CNEDD is also responsible for defining 
the objectives of the rural energy access programme. It coordinates 
the intervention of the different ministries and manages programme 
implementation. 
Société Nigérienne d’Electricité – NIGELEC, is Niger’s power utility, 
established in 1969 and responsible for electricity production, transmission and distribution. While IPPs are allowed to generate power, NIGELEC 
has a monopoly over power distribution across the country. 
Centre National d’Energie Solaire – CNES, the National Centre for Solar 
Energy, was created in 1998 by Act 98-017. Its mandate is to conduct applied solar energy research and solar 
technology experimentation. 
It also participates in diagnostic and 
prospective studies on renewable energy 
use and in training programmes and in 
promotion and communication of renewable energy technologies.
The High Commission on the Development 
of the Valley of the river Niger is responsible for the Kandadji Programme. This 
130 MW hydroelectricity project is now 
under construction.
Institut National de la Recherche 
Agronomique du Niger – INRAN, the 
National Institute of Agronomy Research in 
Niger, carries out applied research on wind 
energy, biogas and biofuels.
Société Nigerienne du Charbon d'Anou 
Araren - SONICHAR, the Nigerien Anou 
Araren Coal Company, created in 1978, 
produces electricity from coal and distributes it to northern Niger. However, its sales 
are restricted to the mining companies at 
Arlit, and it sells the surplus to NIGELEC 
which feeds the cities of Agades, Arlit, and 
Tchirozerine with electricity. It works closely 
with Société Nigérienne de Carbonisation 
du Charbon Minéral (SNCC), the Nigerien 
Mineral Coal Company, which produces 
and sells mineral coal for industrial and 
household use. 
Société Nigérienne des Produits 
Pétroliers - SONIDEP, Nigerien Petroleum 
Products Company, is responsible for 
distributing petroleum products, and 
Société de Raffinage de Zinder - SORAZ, 
Zinder Refining Company, established in 
2010, refines crude oil produced in Niger. 
Compagnie Miniere et Energetique du 
Niger – CMEN, Nigerien Energy and Mining 
Company, is in charge of the Salkadamna 
coal complex including the mine and a 
200 MW coal-fired power plant extendable 
to 600 MW. It is also in charge of hightransmission lines and associated items as 
well as the production unit of a carbonised 
form of bulk briquettes used domestically
Agence Nationale de Financement des 
Collectivités Territoriales – ANFICT, the 
National Agency for Financing National 
Collectives, manages two funds. These 
include the fund supporting decentralisation and the equalisation fund, which 
welcomes development partner contributions to financing local authority 
investments.
Autorité de Régulation Multisectorielle – 
ARM, the Multi-Sector Regulatory Authority, 
addresses IPP licensing, the price of energy 
and the long-term stability of the sector. It 
has several mandates: to develop regulations, train stakeholders and communicate 
information. It also conducts audits, monitors and evaluates procurement and deals 
with bidder complaints. Finally, it prepares 
general administrative clauses and coordinates the draft of clause specifications.
Cellule pour le Partenariat Public Prive 
– PPP, the Public Private Partnership hub, 
was established with a mandate to suggest 
potential areas for PPP development. 
However, it is yet to be fully operational. 
This hub is intended to support technical ministries and public administration in 
developing, negotiating and monitoring 
PPP project implementation.
Abdou Moumouni University is mandated 
by the government to carry out basic 
research and offers a certificate of 
advanced studies in solar energy. It has a 
chair in renewable energy recently set up 
by UNESCO. 

#Energy policies and 
regulatory framework
To forge a strategic pathway, the Nigerien 
authorities need to reconcile short-term 
imperatives for solving urgent concerns 
with long-term plans capable of optimizing natural and human resources for 
sustainable development. Niger’s new 
Plan de Développement Economiqueet 
Social 2012-2015 – PDES, the Economic 
and Social Development Plan, is the frame 
of reference for interventions under the 
government’s medium-term development 
agenda. It is aligned with the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDGs). To this end, it 
builds on progress made in implementing 
the Accelerated Development and Poverty 
Reduction Strategy (ADPRS). Energy infrastructure to sustain long-term economic 
growth is one of the important pillars of 
PDES. Renewable energy deployment 
will help widen energy access for poverty 
reduction and develop local economies, 
particularly in rural areas. 
There are four recent policies and strategies that directly affect the Nigerien 
energy sector. Declaration de Politique 
Energétiques – DPE, the 2004 Energy 
Policy Statement, the national electricity 
reform (2003-4), three national energy 
strategies on renewable energy, energy 
access and domestic energy (2004) and 
Programme National de Reference d’Accès 
aux Services Energétiques - PRASE, the 
2010 National Reference Programme on 
Access to Energy Services.
Declaration de Politique Energétique 
2004. This was adopted by Decree no. 
2004-338/PRN/MME on 28 October 2004. 
It stipulates the need to ensure a reliable 
and adequate energy supply at affordable 
prices as an important component of the 
country’s social and economic development. DPE highlights that Niger is endowed 
with its own significant energy resources 
and needs to mobilise internal and external 
resources to harness them. Specifically, the 
policy advocates 
(i) the promotion of renewable energy 
and 
(ii) national energy resource improvement 
to help raise household energy access 
particularly in rural areas. National 
strategies on domestic and renewable 
energy, rural electrification, oil research 
promotion, and potential hydropower 
assessments would support this 
process (MME, 2004b). 
The policy has been a major step towards 
the introduction of renewable energy 
systems. A series of follow-up strategies 
were developed. 
Electricity reform 2003-2004. The electricity sector was reformed in 2003-4 and 
the Electricity Code was enshrined into law 
through Decree no. 2003-2004. This was 
intended to govern the production, transmission, distribution, import and export of 
power. The terms of the code created the 
conditions for IPPs to play a role in the 
future development of the power sector. To 
this effect, the code asserts that ‘the State 
may authorise one or more natural persons 
or corporate entities to build and to operate, to the satisfaction of their own needs, 
private electrical installations’. 
This was intended to be the initial step 
towards privatising the power sector by 
allowing new players into the electricity 
market. However, Niger did not proceed 
with the privatisation process. 
Three energy strategies followed up the 
energy policy. These include: a) Stratégie Nationale sur les Énergies 
Renouvelables – SNER, National 
Strategy for Renewable Energy. This 
was designed to increase the renewable energy contribution to the national 
energy balance from less than 0.1% in 
2003 to 10% by 2020. 
This was to be done by i) facilitating 
the promotion of renewable energy 
supply ii) reducing the impact on 
forest resources iii) promoting rural 
electrification on the basis of renewable energy resources iv) promoting education, training, research and 
development related to renewable 
energy technologies. 
b) Stratégie Nationale d'Accès aux 
Services Energétiques Modernes -
SNASEM, National Strategy for Access 
to Modernised Energy Services. This 
was designed to increase the proportion of the population with access to 
modernised energy services by 2015. 
This was to be done through i) access 
to modern cooking fuels ii) access to 
motive power for villages with 1,000–
2,000 inhabitants iii) access to electricity for 66% of rural and semi-urban 
populations 
c) Stratégie Nationale des Energies 
Domestiques - SNED, National 
Strategy for Household Energy. This 
was prepared to create a coherent 
framework for the domestic energy 
subsector by 
i) ensuring the sustainable use of forest 
resources and better reforestation, 
promoting alternative energy sources 
(other than wood) and improving 
appliance efficiency 
ii) strengthening the capacity of the main 
market players to better manage the 
sector 
iii) educating and communicating information to stakeholders on domestic 
energy production and use.
PRASE is a national programme that 
resulted from the 2006 ECOWAS White 
Paper. It was set up by Comité National 
Multisectoriel Energie – CNME, the National 
Multisectoral Energy Committee. It involved 
stakeholders from multiple government 
bodies and civil society in recognition of 
the cross-cutting nature of energy. PRASE 
specifically meets the needs of five target 
clusters: 
i) the infrastructure of utilities with 
a social impact (water, health and 
education) 
ii) agricultural infrastructure (crop 
production, livestock and processing) 
iii) communal infrastructure (town halls, 
markets, public lighting, and cultural 
centres) 
iv) small economic production units 
(multifunctional platforms, agricultural 
product transformation, handicrafts, 
trade) 
v) household electricity and modern 
cooking fuels. At the end of PRASE, it 
is anticipated that at least 40% of the 
population in rural areas will benefit 
from modernised energy services 
(MME, 2010).


#Financing and investment
State-backed companies have primarily led finance and investment in the 
energy sector. These include NIGELEC 
and SONICHAR, self-generators such as 
SORAZ and SOMINA and the IPP Aggreko. 
The bulk of the funding sourced by statebacked companies is obtained through 
development partners and institutions. 
These include the African Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank, World 
Bank, West African Development Bank 
and other donors. Although the generation sector has been open to the private 
sector since 2003 with the enactment of 
the Electricity Code, only one IPP, Aggreko, 
has entered the market. That was in 2012. 
The lack of investment in power generation 
can be mainly attributed to the low cost of 
electricity imports (USD 0.04/kWh) from 
neighbouring Nigeria, accounting for about 
70% of the national electricity grid mix. 
A study was commissioned by the Executive 
Secretariat of CNEDD on the renewable 
energy sector. Its findings showed that the 
country experienced a cumulative solar PV 
investment amounting to USD 23.89m in 
2005-2010. More than 90% of this investment was made by development partners. Meanwhile, investment in solar thermal and energy efficiency were entirely 
made by households and businesses. Each 
amounted to less than USD 1m over the 
same period. 
Niger’s tendency to rely on external financial resources to get the energy sector 
moving is confirmed in the PDES. The 2012–
2015 energy priority action plan supporting 
the country's economic growth is expected 
to be mostly sourced from technical and 
financial partners (Table 4). However, the 
government began to allocate a national 
budget in 2012 for the promotion of rural 
electrification. It budgeted USD 0.8m for 
2012 and 2013. This is expected to increase 
to USD 6m p.a until 2016.
Nevertheless, internal mechanisms to 
mobilise resources exist, such as the Energy 
Fund and the tax on electricity. The Energy 
Fund consists of monies collected through 
a levy of USD 0.007 on every litre of oil 
product sold at the pump. 
This is at present used to subsidise LPG 
and oxygen in hospitals. The tax on electricity (TSE) established by Act 72-05 of 
February 12, 1972 was set at USD 0.004 
per kWh consumed. Its aim is to contribute 
to financing grid extension. The resources 
collected through this tax are managed by 
ANFICT and amount to approximately USD 
2m p.a. 
A renewable energy law is currently being 
drafted under which the reallocation of 
part of these funds to rural electrification 
and renewable energy promotion is envisaged. The draft also considers ploughing a 
portion of revenues generated by mineral 
resource exploitation into the country’s 
renewable energy programme.



In 2012, a law on PPPs was adopted. This 
law allows a public entity to contract a 
private entity for the development of 
public infrastructure. A special office was 
opened within the Prime Minister’s cabinet 
to supervise the implementation of the PPP 
law. The aim is to support technical ministries and public administration in elaborating and negotiating PPP projects.


#Incentives
The investment code grants continual 
legal protection to private investors in 
energy production involved in promoting programmes contributing to the social 
and economic development of the country. Under the code, foreign investments 
are protected against expropriation and/
or nationalisation. The code provides three 
privileged regimes and advantages in the 
first five years, depending on the amount 
invested:
Category A (also known as the promotional category) is for investments of 
USD 100,000-200,000. Exemptions are 
divided in two areas, implementation and 
operations. During the implementation 
phase, investors are completely exempt 
from:
•	 Duties and taxes including VAT on
imported materials and equipment, 
provided that these are not available 
locally
•	 Duties and taxes including VAT on
consulting work and services related 
to the implementation of the approved 
investment programme. During the 
operational phase, investors are 
completely exempt from:
•	 Licence
•	 Property tax or estate tax
•	 Tax on industrial and commercial profits and the minimum tax
Category B (also known as the priority category) is for investments of 
USD 200,000-1,000,000. Investors in 
this category benefit from the same 
advantages as those in category A but 
are also accorded the following: 
•	 Exemption from duties and taxes
(excluding VAT) on raw materials, 
consumables and imported or locally 
produced packaging where there is no 
availability in the local market
•	 Exemption from duties and taxes on
product exports
Category C (also known as the conventional category) is for investments of 
over USD 1,000,000. 
Investors in this category may also benefit 
from the same advantages as the previous 
category. In addition, they have the possibility of claiming a 50% reduction on fuel 
duties and taxes and any other source of 
energy used in fixed equipment based on 
an annual agreement. 



#IV. OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE DEPLOYMENT OF RENEWABLE ENERGY IN NIGER
Opportunities to develop the renewables sector in Niger are explored in 
this section. The different subsections focus on different resources and 
conversion technologies, known here as service-resource pairs. In each 
subsection, the status of each particular subsector is reviewed. This is 
followed by the problems that need to be solved and concludes with a 
list of action points recommended by the RRA.


#Grid-connected renewable energy options
Reliable and affordable electricity is a prerequisite for transformative 
development. The grid remains an important means for reaching large 
numbers of people cost-effectively, and extending the grid is by far 
the most common way to provide power to communities. In Niger, the 
grid offers a significant opportunity to broaden access to electricity, 
though formidable technical, institutional, resource and financial barriers remain. Less than 75% of people in urban and less than 2% in rural 
areas are served by the grid at present. This limits growth in critical 
productive sectors such as agro-processing and other small-scale industries. Globally, many of the renewable energy technologies are becoming increasingly cost-competitive. Their deployment would diversify the 
energy supply and build a stable and resilient power infrastructure. This 
section considers grid-based wind and PV technologies for Niger.
On-grid PV
Solar resource conditions in Niger are excellent, so utility-scale and 
distributed solar power generation shows significant promise all over 
the country. In recent years, the cost of PV systems has fallen sharply, 
making it possible for grid-based PV to achieve grid parity. It is, 
therefore, fast becoming a genuine alternative for countries to meet 
their energy access goals and cushion their economies from volatile fossil fuel prices. PV module prices have declined sharply from 
USD 3.70/Wp in 2009 to USD 1.20/Wp today. They may fall yet further to 
USD 0.5/Wp, making the Balance of System (BoS) a crucial determinant of solar PV system costs (IRENA, 2013b). These trends make PV a 
compelling product for end-users in countries such as Niger, which are 
yet to fully develop their energy infrastructure. While there is considerable experience 
of PV systems in Niger, much of it is offgrid. There are no utility-scale PV systems. 
Nevertheless, there is growing interest in 
investor and policy-making circles in taking 
advantage of the potentially major economies of scale of PV-based grid developments. A financial analysis has been made 
as part of the pre-feasibility study of a 
20 MW grid-connected solar PV system 
near Niamey under negotiation at present. It provides a concrete example of how 
grid-based systems are likely to perform 
under the resource and macroeconomic 
conditions prevalent in Niger. Cost figures 
from the project developer were used, 
and it was assumed that power would be 
supplied to NIGELEC at the current utility 
tariff of USD 0.158/kWh. 
The analysis demonstrated a number of 
important features of PV grid systems in 
Niger. The payback period for the system 
is about 12 years (figure 14). This is also 
demonstrated in the levelised cost result 
of USD 0.10/kWh2, illustrating that the 
large PV system can generate power 
at a rate competitive with conventional 
systems. Generation costs for NIGELEC are 
USD 0.22/kWh, which makes the PV option 
attractive from cost as well as security of 
fuel supply considerations. However, as the 
cost of PV systems continues to fall, their 
value as a reliable and cost-effective power 
generation option increases, particularly 
for periods of peak electricity demand 
during the day. Furthermore, the bulk of 
the total cost of the PV systems is in the 
initial cost, while fossil-based systems have 
higher recurrent costs over their lifetime. 

#On-grid wind
There are no grid-connected wind power 
generators in Niger. Windy areas suitable 
for wind power generation are generally 
located in the northern part of the country. 
However, these tend to be sparsely populated. Nevertheless, a few urban centres 
may benefit from wind power investment, 
and in these isolated cases, it may be possible to make the economic case for it. 
A pre-feasibility study was carried out for 
grid-connected wind power generation 
in the relatively windy area of Agadez. 
Turbines would have a combined capacity of 20 MW with an annual generation rate of 45 GWh and system costs of 
USD 3,000/kW. The analysis showed a 
payback period of about 15 years for a 
system that will operate over 20 years, 
feeding the utility at USD 0.158/kWh. The 
levelised cost result was also encouraging at USD 0.10/kWh, illustrating that a 
large wind system can generate electricity at a rate competitive with the incumbent generation system. Further analysis 
was made using a more optimistic system 
cost scenario of USD 2,200/kW, yielding 
a payback period of about ten years and 
a levelised cost of USD 0.07/kWh (Figure 
15)3. The Agadez Area draws electricity 
from a coal-fired system at the moment, 
and this is estimated to have a generation 
cost of about USD 0.12/kWh. This makes 
wind power a cost-competitive option in 
this part of Niger if only generation is taken 
into account. Naturally, other factors also 
need to be taken into account before an 
investment of this magnitude is considered. 
There may be other sites that combine 
favourable wind conditions with other 
factors such as high electricity demand and 
high density of settlement. However, wind 
data across Niger are scanty at best, and a 
detailed national wind energy assessment 
would go some way to identifying appropriate sites for wind power generation. 
Wind power generation offers an opportunity to improve the electrification rate 
by harnessing and diversifying the use of 
locally available resources. It also meets 
the government’s social and economic 
transformation aspirations as outlined in 
PDES. New business models are needed to 
address the frequently high capital cost of 
renewable energy systems and to reduce 
investment risk to meaningfully engage 
the investor community. This requires the 
creation of robust policies and an investment climate conducive to renewable 
energy development and implementation. 
Appropriate regulations including waiver 
on import sales tax and favourable corporation tax for renewable energy developers 
would need to be part of the effort to stimulate investor confidence. Strong efforts 
will also be required to build efficient 
administration and management capacity in responsible government agencies. 
There is also a need to strengthen skills in 
engineering, business, finance and contract 
negotiations across the various actors in 
the private sector. 


#Recommendations
The RRA has highlighted several technical opportunities and barriers facing Niger 
renewable energy generation and transmission infrastructure. It also brought to 
light some of the institutional, financial and 
capacity issues associated with PV and 
wind-based power generation to feed the 
grid. These are discussed below.


#Renewable energy resource assessment
Lack of information on solar and wind 
energy resources is a major obstacle 
to investment due to the difficulties in 
developing robust project proposals. The 
RRA has recommended a set of steps the 
government of Niger should take. These 
include: 
i) identify and analyse existing satellite 
data maps in the public domain 
ii) identify and select areas of great interest in the country from the satellite 
data maps 
iii) install and maintain monitoring stations 
in the selected areas 
iv) compare new data with existing satellite data and refresh the calculation 
models 
v) build a national inventory of renewable 
energy resources. 
CNES could play a pivotal role as the data 
centre, a role it has played in the past 
before the programme was discontinued. 
Re-engaging CNES in this role would allow 
it to build the required human and technical 
capacity to undertake regular renewable 
energy assessments. This would be both on 
behalf of the government and other clients. 
If this does not work out, Niger has other 
options to consider. It could, for instance, 
engage IRENA and/or other partners to 
support its long-awaited solar and wind 
assessment programme. 



#Importance of a national renewable energy policy 
Broadening energy access is a central 
national development objective in Niger. 
At present, less than 25% of the population 
enjoys access to electricity, and the picture 
in rural areas is less than 5%. Generation 
of electricity through renewables has long 
been viewed as an important way to close 
this gap. However, the focus on the renewables contribution to the grid has only 
emerged because new technologies are 
beginning to compete with conventional 
power generation. To this end, an energy 
policy is needed to embrace renewables 
as part of a longer-term energy vision. It 
requires a systematic roadmap for delivery supported by research and financial 
support. 
Policy statements need to be translated 
into concrete action. Policy makers in 
Niger widely acknowledge the important 
role renewables can play in developing the 
power sector. Solar and wind are being 
promoted as reliable energy sources that 
can contribute to reducing dependence 
vis-à-vis imported electricity from Nigeria. 
A number of possibilities are being considered such as the 20 MW solar project near 
Niamey and a 5 MW PV plant in Zinder 
funded by an Indian loan. However, these 
do not give the impression they are part of 
a programme of action, moving beyond ad 
hoc projects. 
Niger has been using auctions to select IPPs 
to provide power to the grid at competitive 
prices. Although these have for the most 
part been conventional (fossil fuel) generators, the country can capitalise on this 
experience to design renewable energy 
auctions supporting large-scale renewables deployment. Renewable energy 
auctions have already become a popular 
policy instrument in some countries. They 
help achieve large-scale deployment in a 
cost-efficient and regulated manner and 
allow price discovery of renewable energy 
based electricity due to the inherent price 
competition (IRENA, 2013c). Policy makers 
designing auctions should investigate the 
pros and cons of each type and determine the most appropriate for the country (sealed bid auctions, reverse clock 
auctions and hybrid auctions). They should 
also clearly determine the capacity to be 
deployed and the numbers of bid rounds 
to be conducted. This has an impact on 
the scale of competition. They also need 
to streamline and create clear, transparent 
administrative procedures for all bidders. 
Finally, they should provide guarantees 
and penalties to minimise risks including 
underbidding, delays and completion failure (Ibid). 


#Long-term planning
Work is about to begin on a master plan 
for the production and transmission of 
electricity, with the assistance of the World 
Bank. The principal objective of the master 
plan is to define short, medium and longterm investment priorities (2013-2035) for 
developing the power sector. This exercise 
offers a real opportunity for the architects 
of the master plan to integrate renewable 
energy into short, medium and long-term 
plans. This is likely to stimulate investment 
interest and acts as a basis for developing a 
portfolio of bankable projects. Meaningful 
integration of renewables into the plan 
would be useful to the private sector and 
also strengthen Niger’s case for support 
from development partners. 

#Setting renewable energy targets
The current strategy has set the objective 
of 10% renewables (excluding biomass) in 
the national energy mix by 2020. However, 
there are no specific guidelines or roadmap for reaching this target. This needs to be 
rectified to provide sufficient substance to 
these targets for the realisation of this goal. 
The RRA makes clear that the vision set 
out by the energy policy, and indeed the 
broader development policy of the country, needs to be complemented by concrete 
studies and analysis. These show how 
these targets would be achieved, who they 
will reach and what the cost implications 
are likely to be. The master planners should 
consider incorporating these requirements, 
since the RRA has demonstrated that they 
have strong political acceptance.


#Enabling environment
Although Niger’s power generation sector 
was opened to IPPs, renewable power projects have not come forward. The development and expansion of the country’s 
renewable energy market partly depends 
on the creation of a favourable legal and 
regulatory framework. This would, among 
other things, reduce technical, legal and 
administrative barriers while increasing 
private sector confidence. An overarching renewable energy law would create 
the right conditions. It should provide 
guaranteed access to the grid and priority 
dispatch of renewable electricity generation. These are currently lacking in the grid 
code. Furthermore, the development of 
a standardised and bankable PPA would 
greatly support the evolution of renewable 
energy auctioning. Transaction costs due 
to lengthy permitting and administrative 
procedures could be greatly reduced by 
setting up a one-stop shop for the private 
sector when dealing with renewable energy 
projects. Niger needs to create a specialised 
office in charge of PPAs. This would define 
a framework for getting PPP contracts up 
and running. As the office in charge of the 
PPP has expressed the desire to promote 
solar power investment, the renewable 
energy law could mandate it to become 
the permitting and licensing structure for 
all renewable energy projects. It could also 
develop a bankable PPA model that would 
cut down on negotiations with private 
sector. A model of this kind could open the 
door to self-producers and IPPs wishing to 
feed their electricity into the grid. It could 
also let in producers who wish to collaborate with utilities to hybridise existing fossil 
fuel generators. 


#Off-grid renewable energy options
The Nigerien government considers energy 
a cross-cutting challenge, given the heavy 
reliance on traditional biomass using 
unsustainable appliances, increasing power 
demand for economic transformation and 
less than 2% rural energy access. Grid 
extension has been traditionally viewed 
as a ‘silver bullet’ for universal electricity 
access. However, it is increasingly becoming clear that the grid pathway on its own 
has limitations. High population dispersal, 
small loads and low load densities across 
large countries such as Niger are some of 
the limiting factors. Extending transmission lines to remote areas in Niger at a cost of 
USD 20,000-120,000/km will be financially 
prohibitive. Different small-scale renewable 
energy technologies like solar PV, wind 
energy and biomass systems are commercially maturing, along with new and innovative service delivery mechanisms. This 
means off-grid electrification has emerged 
as a viable alternative for rural electricity 
access. 
There is considerable experience of offgrid PV electrification, water pumping and 
solar water heating systems in Niger. Each 
of these will be explored below.


#Off-grid PV electricity
The main decentralised renewable energy 
system being promoted in Niger for rural 
electricity is solar PV. It has been employed 
since the 1970s for a variety of end uses: 
water services (village water solar/wind 
pumping), education (lighting), health 
(lighting and refrigeration), telecommunications, agriculture and livestock. As 
of 2013, installed PV capacity for off-grid 
services amounted to over 4,000 kW 
(Table 5). Most of these are installed by 
government agencies, community-based 
organisations, telecommunication companies and NGOs.
There is considerable scope for deploying PV for rural electrification in Niger. 
Depending on the load characteristics 
and resource availability, this could take 
the form of stand-alone PV, mini-grids or 
hybrid PV-diesel systems. The stand-alone 
systems are generally suitable for small 
loads whereas the other two are generally for meeting larger loads at community scale. Such schemes are vital for rural 
productivity as they provide continuous 
electricity. They sometimes combine two 
or more different kinds of technologies 
for generating and distributing electricity to a range of consumer types through 
an independent grid. Combining different 
technologies with different energy sources 
means the comparative advantage of each 
technology is exploited. 
For example, using renewable energy 
alongside a genset has proved to be the 
least cost option in many rural communities. 
This is because the benefits of each technology can be mutually complementary. A 
cost simulation was carried out for a typical 
village around Ayorou in Niger with a daily 
load of 585 kWh to meet a variety of end 
uses. These included community lighting, 
water pumps, lighting for homes, schools 
and clinics, and power for small businesses. 
Three options were evaluated4: PV grid 
(with battery storage) as well as diesel 
and hybrid (PV and diesel), using present 
Nigerien component and fuel prices. The 
life cycle cost result showed that both PV 
and the hybrid options compare favourably against the diesel option (Figure 16). 
This is true even at a low diesel price of 
USD 0.75 per litre (l). 
Two observations can be made from the 
life cycle cost comparison. Firstly, the 
distribution of costs for the diesel option 
shows that 60% of total costs are in the 
operating costs (mainly fuel costs). For the 
PV option, on the other hand, over 75% of 
total costs are capital costs. Clearly, this 
has major implications for rural communities in acquiring finance for PV systems. It 
brings all the more urgency to new business models, sound policy development 
and supportive institutions. For the diesel 
option, the risk is put off to a time when 
rising or falling prices could expose the 
plant to changes beyond user community 
control. There is little resilience and stability in the system. 
The second interesting observation relates 
to the hybrid system. This combines the 
best features of the two options. On the 
one hand, the reduced size of the PV 
system implies lower upfront costs. On 
the other, reduced diesel consumption 
means lower system vulnerability. In addition, the hybrid option (without storage) 
performs better. It has a levelised cost of 
USD 0.17/kWh against USD 0.20/kWh 
and USD 0.24/kWh for the PV and diesel 
options respectively. 
It is worth noting here that the cost of 
diesel for electrification at USD 0.75/litre 
is below the pump selling price in Niger 
(USD 1.076) and the African average. This 
is at about USD 1.20/litre (World Bank, 
2013c). An analysis against diesel costs 
shows that if prices increase in line with the 
selling price and average African levels, the 
levelised cost of generation using diesel 
rises sharply. However, the likely changes 
are relatively smooth and therefore easier 
to manage and adapt (figure 17). Of course, 
PV prices are also falling rapidly, and if 
further reductions are experienced in the 
market, the cost of PV generation only 
becomes more attractive. The government’s import tariff at 52% will need to be 
reviewed so that Niger can fully benefit 
from global price changes. 
Important new players are also entering the PV market, and their involvement and reach could be beneficial. 
Telecommunications companies such as 
Airtel and Orange fall into this category. In 
order to reduce their oil bill and improve 
the reliability of services, both Airtel and Orange are investing in solar PV to power 
their sites off the mains. By 2011, Airtel had 
equipped its 170 sites with PV; each site 
consisted of 36 panels (185 Wp each) for 
a system size of 6.7 kW per site. Airtel has 
thus far installed a total of 1.132 MW PV 
capacity. Prior to this initiative, all these 
sites used diesel and each had a monthly 
consumption of 1,500 litres. This amounted 
to 18,000 litres p.a. Migration to solar PV 
enables Airtel to save USD 16,700 per site or 
USD 2.84m p.a. The cost of the equipment 
amounts to USD 100,000 per site, so there 
is a payback period of about 5.5 years.
Orange started making a similar move 
in 2009. Currently, 250 sites located in 
remote areas are powered by solar PV 
with an installed capacity of 11 kW per site. 
The cost of the equipment by site is about 
USD 90,000 and replaces 600 litres of 
diesel consumption per month. Savings 
amount to USD 6,600 per site p.a. or about 
USD 1.7m for all 250 sites. The company’s 
target is to reach 25% solar PV penetration in its overall energy consumption. The 
emergence of these powerful commercial 
players in the PV market indicates that 
the technology is reliable and low cost for 
generating electricity. It could go some 
way to helping the PV sector achieve some 
degree of visibility and credibility. They 
can also be useful partners in communicating the technology as a serious, mature 
alternative to be taken seriously by policy 
makers and the general public. 


#Off-grid wind power
Wind power for rural electrification using 
stand-alone and mini-grid delivery systems 
has come a long way. Though this technology is not new, the learning curve in turbine 
and control technologies over the past two 
decades has been significant. As indicated 
in section 2, the favourable wind regime 
across Niger can provide much needed 
power for rural communities, especially in 
the northern part of the country. However, 
work needs to be done to improve wind 
intelligence for energy resource assessments. It is also important to recognise that 
Niger’s experience is limited to a few cases 
of wind pumping. Wind energy for electrification is a new area for Niger. However, it 
could be significant if the country is able to 
prepare the ground for investment. 
Using available data from Agadez (a northern urban area), a simple simulation was 
carried out to assess the potential that 
wind could play in off-grid electrification. 
The study looked at the cost involved 
to install a wind generator capable of 
delivering 1,000 kWh per day to a rural 
community with multiple loads. The study 
also looked different price scenarios (i.e.
USD 2,000/kW and USD 3,000/kW) for a 
hybrid system combined with diesel over a 
20-year timespan5. As illustrated in figure 
18, the analysis demonstrated two points. 
Firstly, wind systems can potentially be 
cost-effective options. Levelised costs are 
USD 0.17-0.23/kWh. However, a significant 
upfront cost is incurred, and financing it 
will remain a challenge. Secondly, the analysis showed that the hybrid system, with 
a levelised cost of USD 0.25/kWh, did not 
perform as well as wind systems on its own. 
The northern regions tend to enjoy fairly 
good windy conditions and thus hybrid 
systems may not offer better answers for 
rural electrification. Yet the hybrid option 
provides the important advantage of lower 
initial cost compared to a single resource 
renewable system. It is worth noting that 
the hybrid option may offer other advantages in regions where the wind is not as 
strong or with a high degree of intermittency. This is because it would improve 
power output stability. 


#Off-grid PV water pumping
Access to an improved water source refers 
to the percentage of the population with 
least 20 litres per person per day within 
1 km of the dwelling from an improved 
source. This could be a household connection, public standpipe, borehole, protected 
well or spring, and rainwater collection. 
According to African Ministers’ Council On 
Water (AMCOW) (2011), Niger is still a long 
way from achieving the MDG targets for 
water supply. At present, water coverage 
extends to 48% of the population - 39% of 
the rural population and 96% of the urban 
population. This leaves a water-related 
MDG target gap of 32%. Niger has an estimated 2.5bn m3 of underground renewable 
water, but only 20% is currently exploited, 
according to the United Nations Children's 
Fund. Hence, Niger has the potential to 
achieve universal access to water and sanitation, but financial resources are limited 
and institutions to help deliver this goal are 
weak. 
Hand pumps, diesel generators, PV systems 
and some wind pumps are in use. There are 
ongoing and upcoming projects in Niger to 
improve access to rural water services, and 
development partners and international 
institutions provide significant support to 
the government’s efforts. The government 
also recognises that part of the water challenge is rooted in the lack of energy technologies for pumping water to the endusers. Hence, high water coverage requires 
the introduction of new technologies and 
improvement of existing ones. As PV technologies are coming down in price, PV 
pumps are rapidly becoming more attractive than the traditional power sources 
such as diesel and gasoline driven systems. 
A life-cycle cost analysis conducted for Niger using country-specific data showed 
that over the longer term PV performs 
better than diesel for the same service 
(Figure 19). It also provides a more stable 
water supply6. The high initial cost of the 
PV system compared to the diesel system 
is moderated when taking a longer-term 
perspective. This is because the running 
cost of the diesel system places a higher 
cost burden on users over the longer term. 
The levelised cost for the two PV system 
sizes indicated was USD 0.12-0.14/m3 of 
water delivered, while the diesel yielded 
USD 0.17-0.20/m3. This illustrates how 
emerging trends in price and technology 
favours PV over diesel. This is likely to 
continue. 
A large percentage of Niger’s population works in subsistence farming, relying 
entirely on rainfall and therefore vulnerable 
to high climate variability. This form of agricultural practice is unsustainable as farmers are falling victim to recurrent droughts. 
Thus, the need to provide water services is 
not limited to the household sector. It also 
extends to the agricultural sector, which 
the government is eager to support to 
boost food security as well as diversify its 
trade. Thus the need for improved irrigation 
services will assume greater importance. 
Affordable and reliable energy for pumping 
water for irrigation could play a central role 
in improving the earnings of smallholders 
and transform rural economies. 


#Solar water heating
Solar water heating has a long history in 
Niger. CNES was a central player, installing 
some 508 solar water heaters in 1976-1997, 
with capacities of 200-1,000 litres per day. 
Most of these were installed in homes. 
However, this programme could not be 
sustained as the local currency went 
through a devaluation for imported components. Maintenance quality and cost control 
were other factors that led to the demise of 
this programme. However, there was never 
any doubt that solar water heating systems 
can contribute significant energy savings 
for businesses and large institutions. The 
technology is mature, simple to repair and 
replicate, and heats water cost-effectively. 
The CNES programme was motivated by the 
fact that major hot water users could make 
significant financial savings by switching 
from diesel and electric water heating to 
solar heating systems. The most common 
type of solar water heater in Niger incorporates a 2m2 flat-plate solar collector and 
a 200 litre storage tank. It has a payback 
period of less than 2-3 years. 
Based on these experiences, the viability 
of solar water heaters in the resource and 
economic context of Niger is convincing. 
A domestically produced (refurbished) 
solar heater with a typical 200 litre load 
and capital cost of about USD 1,000 has 
a payback period of under three years. 
This is for a system with a 20-year lifetime 
(Figure 20). Imported systems, which fetch 
USD 2,000 in the Nigerien market, pay 
back within less than four years. Hence, 
continuing to rely on grid electricity or 
diesel means more expensive water heating services. A shift towards solar systems 
means grid electricity could be freed up for 
other end uses or could satisfy suppressed 
demand in various sectors. 
The CNES experience indicates a robust 
national promotions programme and skills 
development is critical to mainstreaming 
the technology. Capacity development is 
not a single intervention but a process that 
needs to envisage the long-term picture 
and be integrated into a broader innovation policy. This requires long-term planning and investment. It has to be framed 
into a comprehensive policy framework 
stimulating the emergence of new regulations. These have a specific mandate for 
different sectors (industrial, tourism and 
households) to install solar water heaters. 

#Recommendations
The RRA has highlighted that the contribution of off-grid renewable systems to 
the energy mix in Niger is growing. It is 
also important to note that decentralised 
renewable energy development in Niger 
will not provide all the answers to universal access. However, given the dispersed 
population and type of economic activities, 
decentralised systems are part of the solution. Some specific findings from the RRA 
relevant to decentralised energy systems in 
Niger are outlined below. 

#Importance of a comprehensive energy policy for rural energy
Niger needs a comprehensive energy policy 
that puts the needs and demands of rural 
communities centre stage and provides 
clear guidance on how to make progress. 
The policy should also be explicit that rural 
communities need a bottom-up strategy 
due to their low energy demand and scattered nature. This would bring together 
local development plans and information 
on resources, finance and skills in order to 
design a coordinated plan of action sensitive to location. 
The RRA underscored that institutional and 
financial support efforts need to clearly 
distinguish not only between grid-based 
and off-grid but also between urban and 
rural electrification. Rural electrification 
should centre around two main implementation axes: 
i) promotion of the private sector as a 
major player in implementing rural 
electrification programmes and 
creation of the enabling environment 
for the private sector to flourish 
ii) introduction of rural energy service 
concessions that would allow an entity 
(private sector, NGO, communitybased organisation etc.) to exclusively 
serve one or more defined areas under 
a concessionary agreement. 


#Improve the regulatory environment for rural electrification
An organisation must be established to 
manage, develop and implement a rural 
renewable electrification strategy and 
programme. It must also create the enabling 
environment for the private sector, ensure 
effective implementation and maintain 
quality assurance. 
This organisation needs to be a legal entity 
and could fill several important gaps. For 
example, it could: 
i) stimulate the supply and demand of 
rural electrification services through 
communications with potential partners (both public and private); 
ii) guide operators towards lowest cost 
innovative solutions; 
iii) establish the annual rural electrification programme and ensure effective 
follow-up; 
iv) manage relationships with donors and 
potential investors; 
v) ensure effective implementation in 
accordance to enforced norms and 
standards.
This organisation must aim to optimise 
the use of resources for rural electrification and maintain mechanisms already in 
place through important principles. These 
include equity, technology neutrality, high 
technical standards, poverty eradication 
and the protection of investor interests. 
Furthermore, provision within the renewable energy law should be made to amend 
the country’s current tax policies on renewable energy technologies. This can be done 
by reducing the current import duties and 
VAT that affect their competitiveness.


#Raise domestic funds for
rural electrification
The rural electrification challenge is enormous and will require both external and 
domestic finance. The RRA drew attention to 
the importance of raising domestic finance 
to calibrate internal investment with wider 
development goals. It asserted that rural 
electrification should feature prominently 
within such a framework. Mozambique’s 
FUNAE Fund is a case in point. Niger could 
consider following this example to raise 
funding from taxes collected from mineral 
and petroleum exploitation to promote 
rural electrification. This could include: 
i) taxes on electricity concessions 
ii) a rural electrification levy on electricity 
sold to end-users 
iii) taxes on bulk electricity consumers 
iv) taxes on oil and mining exploration 
v) taxes related to the transport and 
marketing of petroleum products 
vi) taxes on commercial licences 
vii) annual budgetary allocation by the 
state 
viii) funding obtained from development 
partners 
ix) personal contributions from the operators and other donors.

#Energy master plan
Part of the difficulty of appreciating Niger’s 
deep energy crisis is explained by almost 
non-existent national planning on current 
and future energy demands. The forthcoming master plan is welcome and long overdue. It needs to help define short, medium 
and long-term access targets supported 
by technology-specific targets within 
predefined geographic areas for off-grid 
electrification. The limited energy resource 
assessments already available show that 
Niger enjoys sufficient resources to make 
major progress in meeting energy access 
targets, especially solar and to some degree 
wind. Renewable energy options like solar 
and wind should feature prominently in the 
master plan. 

#Improve R&D: revitalise CNES
Niger will rely on sourcing technologies 
from abroad for the foreseeable future. 
This will need to continue in tandem with 
efforts to upgrade innovation systems that 
will support domestic technology adoption and development. However, cheap 
solar panels and components are entering 
the Nigerien market from neighbouring 
countries, with no institutionalised quality assurance and standard schemes. This 
does not help the reputation of these technologies, still in their early stages, when 
systems break down. CNES could play an 
important role in supporting the development of renewable energy technology standards and certification schemes for installers as part of the industry’s revitalisation. 
This increases end-user confidence in the 
technologies deployed. A programme of 
this kind would have the additional benefit 
of creating new skilled jobs throughout 
the value chain from small distributors to 
installers, maintainers and end-users.

#Load shedding: an opportunity 
for renewables
Power cuts are costly and weigh heavily on 
the economy, both in Niger and across the 
whole of Africa. The widespread response 
from wealthier households and businesses 
is to find alternative solutions – i.e. gensets. 
There has been a noticeable increase in the 
sales of gensets in Niger since 2010 due to 
recurrent load shedding and generation 
problems in Nigeria. However, there are 
no official data on the number of gensets 
in Nigerien households. This is a problem 
from the perspective of national energy 
planning. Lack of data on this suppressed 
demand makes it difficult to plan. But this 
presents an opportunity for PV systems 
because load shedding difficulties are 
deep-seated structural problems and 
unlikely to be resolved immediately. Many 
in Niamey are already using solar to cope 
with rolling blackouts. However, in most of 
these cases this is a form of crisis management rather than a more permanent solution to energy dilemmas. The electricity 
code (article 7) allows one or more natural persons or corporate entities to build 
and operate private electrical installations 
to the satisfaction of their own needs. 
Nigerien policy makers could encourage 
individuals and businesses to become 
self-producers. This would solve the user’s 
immediate energy problems and help boost 
the renewable energy market. This market 
is under-estimated, both for its size and its 
potential as an important driver for scaling 
up renewables. 

#Assess the economics of
a range of technologies
There is growing experience of a variety 
of technologies in Niger. It is important to 
document and assess the cost of single and hybrid technologies in the different 
regions. This provides a dynamic data 
system that assembles data on the range of 
technologies and their performance under 
different conditions. The diesel based minigrid operated by NIGELEC offers a compelling case for hybridisation with RE sources. 
Solar irradiation is abundant throughout 
the country. Detailed feasibility studies on 
hybridising the diesel mini-grids with solar 
PV would, therefore, help demonstrate the 
economics of these systems to potential 
investors.

#Provide soft loan schemes
or other credit line
facilities for solar PV
Despite their comparative advantage, 
decentralised renewables are not suitable 
for conventional financial mechanisms 
due to their high transaction costs. Rural 
communities with little disposable income 
hardly feature as natural clients for conventional financial institutions. Soft loans can 
be attractive when a small sum is paid as 
a down payment of the total price and 
the rest paid over a number of years. With 
bank interest rates at 13% in Niger, households and businesses are unlikely to take 
out loans to meet renewable energy costs. 
However, grants from multilateral agencies or donors could be ring-fenced to 
mobilise soft loan schemes for household 
or community electrification. While this 
cannot be considered a long-term solution 
to the challenge of raising funding, it could 
provide energy for social development 
needs. It may also serve to stimulate the 
renewables market in rural areas. 

#Capacity development and mobilisation
Niger suffers from capacity deficit in the 
energy sector in general. With the establishment of CNES as long ago as the 1960s, 
it was one of the first movers in renewable 
energy. However, that was not sustained, 
though there is some capacity to build on 
in PV and water heating applications. The 
RRA has identified capacity development 
for planning, financing and implementing 
off-grid and on-grid programmes as a top 
policy priority. Only then will the promise of renewable energy development be 
fulfilled


#Biomass for cooking and heating
Energy for cooking is a major preoccupation in Niger. It is one aspect of the energy 
picture in Niger and other parts of the Sahel 
that has confounded experts. The solutions 
to problems associated with biomass, such 
as indoor air pollution and the extensive 
time and energy needed for its collection, 
appear straightforward. Yet most studies indicate that biomass energy (or fuel 
wood) will remain an important source of 
household energy. This is due to a whole 
range of obstacles. For instance, LPG and 
other petroleum fuels are not affordable 
to many people, other energy sources 
are remote, non-biomass appliances have 
a high investment cost, the technology is 
unsuitable for local conditions. 
There have been significant recent developments that may transform the cooking 
and heating landscape. This is the emergence of important players like the Global 
Alliance for Clean Cookstoves (GACC). 
This is beginning to mobilise global and 
national institutions and resources to solve 
this problem. At the same time, a new 
generation of advanced and more effective 
biomass cookstoves is showing signs of 
commercial viability. Meanwhile, new business models are coming through that will 
generate new sales. 
These developments show plenty of promise, but the path to large-scale adoption 
faces many barriers. These include institutional, technical, consumer, finance and 
national development priorities. These all 
exist in Niger to a varying degree depending on the social and economic group.


#Biogas as a potential
cooking resource
Numerous discussions and initiatives exist 
in Niger involving improved cookstoves, 
sustainable wood harvesting and biofuels. However, the RRA focused on biogas, 
largely because there is positive experience in this technology, and biogas offers 
benefits beyond cooking. 
Nigerien experience in biogas dates as far 
back as 1980 under a project by INRAN. 
Ten facilities were installed by INRAN in 
collaboration with the French organisation GERDAT. Another five were installed 
through Chinese cooperation to produce 
biogas for cooking, lighting and electricity 
in combination with diesel fuel for electricity production. These facilities were abandoned by the beneficiaries due to lack of 
maintenance. The failures observed were 
of a technical and socio-economic nature.
A feasibility study was carried out in Niger 
to set up a national biogas programme. 
This planned to establish 15,000 rural 
biodigesters over five years for a total of 
USD 3.45m around the river Niger, rich in 
water resources. The following financial 
arrangement was planned: a grant of 40% 
from the Dutch Cooperation, 55% from 
recipients who had to be engaged with a 
microfinance institution and 5% from the 
state. Unfortunately this programme failed 
to materialise because the microfinance 
institutions did not want to engage in the 
energy sector. They asked for a guarantee 
from the state to back the risk if their investment did not yield the expected returns.
In trying to understand the potential of 
biogas in rural areas, it is worth analysing 
the economic impacts by calculating and 
comparing the cooking costs. The analysis 
below makes a comparison of the costs of 
various stove types where the value of the 
fuel used is calculated first. The comparison is between collected fuelwood and 
biogas. In the case of wood, the average 
fuel collection time per month is multiplied by the national wage rate using a 
per capita income estimate for Niger. 
World Bank figures of USD 160 p.a. per 
capita assuming 40 working hours per 
week produce a maximum labour rate of 
USD 0.08/hour. The number of hours 
spent collecting wood for traditional 
stoves amounts to USD 41.6 p.a. and 
USD 20.8 p.a. for the new generation 
of stoves. Stove costs are estimated by 
dividing the stove price by its average 
lifetime. The biogas cost is estimated at 
USD 916 for a 6m3 plant (ten-year lifetime) while costs for traditional stoves are 
USD 6 (three-year lifetime). New 
generation stoves are assumed to cost 
USD 25 (five-year lifetime). Thus, the total 
cooking cost is worked out by adding 
together the fuel cash cost, the value of 
fuel collection time and the stove costs.
Using the above assumptions, a 
profile of comparative cooking costs is 
constructed. These estimates suggest 
the new stoves perform best at 
USD 0.17/kg of wood equivalent, traditional 
stoves at USD 0.28/kg and biogas at 
USD 0.64/kg of wood equivalent. These 
estimates are for illustrative purposes to 
highlight the cost of labour (mainly women 
and children) for fuelwood collection as 
the defining variable in this comparison. 
But there is a caveat here. When other 
aspects such as health impacts and environmental externalities are considered, 
the picture is likely to look different. 
Furthermore, if the national wage triples 
to USD 480 — still very low — and wood 
collection hours remain constant, the cost 
comparison shifts in favour of biogas. This 
suggests that the higher cost of labour 
increases the economic cost of using collected biomass beyond the biogas-biomass break-even point. This rather rough 
analysis indicates that biogas could have 
a wider appeal in future. It could therefore be worth investing in a robust biogas 
programme as in parts of Asia. This would 
also bring down the cost of biogas plants as 
they move from their current niche status 
into the mass market. This has occurred 
in various Asian countries such as India, 
Nepal and China. 
Other biofuel production possibilities 
mainly involve crop waste. This includes 
crops specifically intended for human 
consumption grown during the winter 
season (millet, sorghum, maize, rice, cowpea) and cash crops (peanut, cotton, 
sesame, sugarcane, moringa). It also 
includes forest species that grow naturally 
such as jatrophacurcas, neem and balanites. For the moment there is no biodiesel production in Niger, and the different 
oils such as peanut oil and shea butter 
that can be used to generate biodiesel are 
mainly used for food. There is little experience in Niger of using crops like these for 
bioenergy.

#Recommendations
During the RRA, the discussion focused 
mainly on biogas and improved cookstoves. A number of opportunities and 
problems were identified that are specific 
to the biomass sector. They include: 
i) The absence of a clearly defined 
policy on the use of biomass, including 
biogas 
ii) Lack of institutional coordination and 
collaboration between financial institutions and other stakeholders 
iii) Importance of standards for biogas 
and other biomass fuel types. Some 
specific interventions areas were identified during the RRA.

#Emphasis on biogas
This biomass sector has delivered excellent 
results and supported rural development 
in various parts of Asia. In Africa, Rwanda 
now has a promising programme. The 
National Biogas Programme of Rwanda 
has reached an important milestone in that 
it has successfully set up a commercially 
viable biogas industry. 
This will contribute to the well-being of the 
country’s population while reducing pressure on natural resources. The RRA recognised the potential of biogas in Niger, and 
the Niger biogas feasibility study has been 
conclusive. There is good reason to develop 
a business model that would bring microfinance institutions to the negotiating table. 

#CRITICAL NEED FOR Finance
Nepal is an excellent example of how 
multiple innovation nodes are critical to 
successful biogas programmes. The central 
elements of this programme have been 
innovation in financial engineering as well 
as the judicious distribution of grants to 
beneficiaries. Furthermore, the Nepal 
programme successfully motivated the 
external and domestic banks to sculpt a 
well-structured loan and grant programme 
for small-scale farmers and medium-sized 
rural enterprises. 
Niger could emulate the Nepalese 
programme. However, bringing together 
stakeholders such as these requires lobbying by potential project developers. 

#Opportunities and 
constraints for scaling up 
renewable energy deployment
#Policy stagnation
Policies need to be dynamic because they 
often have side effects or unintended 
consequences. Part of the problem in 
Niger, and indeed in much of Africa, is that 
energy policies are a static list of goals 
or laws. They do not undergo periodic 
reviews to evaluate their effectiveness and 
help guide operational decisions. Policy 
tends to evolve with changing contexts, 
so formal policy needs to be periodically 
adjusted. The government of Niger should 
carry out a review of existing policies and 
strategies and revise them. 
They need to be compatible with the country’s development goal of supporting social 
welfare, and enhance income-generating 
activities. The renewable energy law and 
master plan are important steps to embedding energy service provision into development needs. After the formal presentation 
of the renewable energy law, dialogue with 
the whole range of stakeholders should be 
maintained. 
#Track record in auctions
Niger has been using auctions as an instrument to select IPPs for providing conventional power at competitive prices to the 
grid. As far as renewable power generation is concerned, it can capitalise on this 
experience to design renewable energy 
auctions. This could be applied to both 
large-scale grid-connected power plants 
but also for hybridising bundles of decentralised power plants. Policy makers and 
executives should be equipped with the 
knowledge of the intricacies of designing renewable energy auctions and ensure 
they are successfully conducted. 
#WAPP effect
West African regional power development 
work is progressing, and a number of transmission and rehabilitation projects have 
already been completed. Niger is expected 
to benefit from power imports and exports 
as a way to stabilise its power sector and 
create greater supply reliability. Moreover, 
renewable energy technologies can play 
a major role in developing an integrated 
power pool. This is because their share in 
the region could reach 52% by 2030 if the 
cost of these technologies continues to 
fall and if fossil fuel prices remain volatile 
(IRENA, 2013a). 
For low consumption countries such as 
Niger, this could represent a reduction 
in the long-run marginal cost (LRMC) of 
power by USD 0.02-0.07/kWh (Eberhard 
et al., 2011). WAPP promises to usher in 
an era of cheaper and more secure power. 
That should be welcome, but cross-border 
power transmission will still require considerable investment, a high degree of collective ownership and coordination. This is 
new territory for public policy with limited 
precedence in Africa. Niger has mixed 
experiences of its electricity imports from 
Nigeria. The effect of an emerging highly 
interconnected power infrastructure on 
costs and reliability is uncertain. It is also 
important to consider the effect WAPP will 
have on rural areas, as most will continue 
to rely on decentralised systems. Further 
assessment will be needed to guide 
Nigerien policy makers on the benefits and 
costs of the WAPP interconnection system. 
They can then plan appropriately. 
#Political fragmentation
Energy supports development and therefore cuts across ministerial and sector 
boundaries. Policy makers face energy 
supply and cost challenges as they aim to deliver positive outcomes for their respective sectors. The fractured responsibilities within Niger’s energy policy make the 
different government entities prone to turf 
battles. This indicates a lack of coordination among the departments involved. This 
tension is expected to rise with the discovery of oil and gas. There may be power 
struggles between those who see the 
transformative potential of renewables and 
those who supervise the fossil-fuel sector. 
This calls for a comprehensive energy 
policy that places sector requirements 
within a coherent framework. It requires 
policy makers to appreciate that a mix of 
technologies at different scales is the foundation for healthy energy governance in 
Niger, and to act on that basis. Central to 
the success of any energy policy is getting 
the governance structure right. Government 
players need to be willing to be part of a 
wider inter-ministerial dialogue on energy 
matters and build appropriate institutions 
that deliver results on the ground. 
Clearly, this will require some degree 
of policy experimentation and learning 
through doing. Ultimately, the success of 
the country’s energy development mission 
will be judged by the quality of its results 
and scale of improvements in livelihoods. 
Renewable energy applications across 
Niger have been linked to excellent social 
development outcomes. The cost of renewables is at an all-time low, especially PV. If 
they are to support productive sectors in 
rural areas, stronger coordination between 
all stakeholders is required. 
#Decentralisation
Experience in Niger demonstrates that offgrid energy systems can play a significant 
role in rural energy programmes. However, 
more work is needed to ensure that prices 
become competitive and affordable for 
which the range of pro-poor financing 
mechanisms can be tested and evaluated. 
The renewable energy law and master plan 
will have to come up with potential recommendations to bring costs down for both 
potential suppliers and end-users. They will 
need to consider the financial measures 
often necessary in the first stages of technology diffusion. At that point, there are 
few market players and the opportunities 
to develop economies of scale are limited. 
Furthermore, it is important to build an 
inventory of experiences in Niger in terms 
of the range of delivery mechanisms and 
business models. It is also important to 
assess how emerging regulatory frameworks could impact on mainstreaming 
decentralised renewable energy options. 
#Unique knowledge store
Energy knowledge generation of this kind 
could help develop a dynamic techno-economic assessment framework for decentralised electricity and heat system design. 
It could take materials sourcing, installation costs, available energy resources, 
energy storage options, design robustness 
and social acceptance into consideration. 
Building this store of knowledge would 
help Niger develop its energy strategy 
using informed and tailored technical and 
business models. These would be compatible with local resources, institutions and 
economic factors. Institutionalising energy 
knowledge in this way would give ample 
confidence to policy makers, social entrepreneurs and private sector players. This is 
because it would provide them with up-todate information about various technologies in the context of Niger. 
