File Name: NGA-NGP-2017-EN
Year: 2017
Country Name: Nigeria
Country Code: NGA
Category: NGP
Document Title: Nigeria National Gas Policy
Exists?: Y
Publication Date: 2017
Start Year: 2020
End Year: 2030
Language: EN
------------------------------------------------

#1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Statement of Gas Policy
This policy document builds on the policy goals of the Federal Government for the gas 
sector as presented in the 7 Big Wins initiative (www.7Bigwins.com) developed by the
Ministry of Petroleum Resources and the National Economic Recovery & Growth Plan 
(ERGP 2017 – 2020).
The Policy articulates the vision of the Federal Government of Nigeria, sets goals, 
strategies and an implementation plan for the introduction of an appropriate 
institutional, legal, regulatory and commercial framework for the gas sector. It is 
intended to remove the barriers affecting investment and development of the sector. 
The policy will be reviewed and updated periodically to ensure consistency in 
Government policy objectives at all times.
Government shall abide by the provisions of this policy unless and until reviewed or 
replaced by a formal restatement of policy duly gazetted by the Government.
Background – A Much More Constrained International Business Environment
For approximately ten years until around 2014, Nigeria was exposed to a very benign 
international environment, with high gas prices, strong global demand for gas and 
LNG, and large flows of investment looking for opportunities in emerging markets for 
gas based industrialisation (such as petrochemicals, methanol, fertilisers). 
Those benign times have now passed and the international business environment is
now much tougher. International gas prices have fallen, huge new volumes of gas and 
LNG supplies are coming on stream globally, against reduced forecasts of market 
demand growth. Meanwhile, global investment flows are leaving emerging markets. 
Even within Africa, Nigeria is competing for investment with Southern and Eastern
Africa.
Background – Gas Master Plan
This gas policy is based on a fundamental review of the policy positions of the 
Government over the last ten years in respect of Nigeria’s gas resources. 
The previous policy positions emanated from the Gas Master Plan (GMP), which was 
designed to ensure the development of a full blown domestic market by 2015. 
However, the Plan has not delivered on all its set targets. For example, Nigeria still 
lacks critical gas infrastructure and continues to fall short of Domestic Gas Supply 
Obligations.
Nigeria is experiencing a full-blown energy crisis in spite of its abundant gas 
resources. A new gas policy that is more effective and adjusted for the much harsher 
international business environment for gas is required to drive the reforms necessary 
to attract investment into the sector.
Vision: To be an attractive gasbased industrial nation, giving primary 
attention to meeting local gas demand requirements, and developing a 
significant presence in international markets”.
Mission: “To move Nigeria from a crude oil export-based economy to an 
attractive oil and gas-based industrial economy”.
The gas policy intends to move Nigeria from an oil-based to an oil and gas-based 
industrial economy. This gas-based industrialisation will be driven by some CORE 
PRINCIPLES:
• Separate the respective roles and responsibilities of government and the 
private sector;
• Establish a single independent petroleum regulatory authority;
• Implement full legal separation of the upstream from the midstream;
• Implement full legal separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations 
from gas trading;
• Realise more of the LNG international downstream value;
• Pursue a project-based, rather than a centrally-planned domestic gas 
development approach;
• Make a strong maintenance and safety culture a priority;
• Implement international best practice for environmental protection;
• Establish strong linkages with electric power, agriculture, transport and 
industrial sectors;
• Establish payment discipline throughout the energy chain;
• Honour stability of contract terms;
• Ensure security of assets;
• Ensure compliance with the Nigerian Content Act.
The main aspects of the gas policy now cover:

1. Governance (Legislation and Regulation):
a. Single independent petroleum regulatory authority;
b. Emphasis on petroleum safety compliance;
c. Full legal separation of the upstream from the midstream;
d. Full legal separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations 
from gas trading;
e. Introduction of a relevant gas network code;
f. Pricing:
i. Upstream gas price set by netback from export parity price
during transitional period;
ii. Market-led wholesale gas pricing after the transitional period;
iii. Triggers for announcement of competitive wholesale market;
iv. LNG export tolling price;
v. Cost benchmarking for infrastructure facilities;
g. Fiscal framework which recognises gas as a stand-alone commodity 
and industry separate from oil.2. Industry Structure:
a. Mixed public-private participation, with a clear separation of roles 
between government and the private sector;
b. Restructuring of NGC into separate transport and gas marketing 
companies;
c. Strategic partnerships to support operations, in particular, for NGPTC;
d. Greater involvement in marketing Government–owned equity gas in 
international markets;
e. Move towards wholesale market competition;
f. Implementation of Domestic Gas Supply Obligations;
g. A review of gas aggregation policy and the future role of the Gas 
Aggregation Company of Nigeria.
3. Developing Gas Resources:
a. Enable an environment that encourages exploration specifically 
targeting gas;
b. Encourage exploration and development of new gas supply sources 
from the inland and offshore basins;
c. Develop portfolio management methodologies to prioritise low-cost gas 
development;
d. Clarify gas terms for PSCs;
e. Achieve gas flare-out through gas utilisation projects utilising mature 
flare reduction technologies;
f. Produce a Gas Resource Management Plan.
4. Infrastructure:
a. Identify and proceed with the development of key gas infrastructure;
b. Liberalise access to offshore and onshore gas transmission 
infrastructure and gas processing.
5. Building Gas Markets:
a. Continue gas exports consistent with domestic gas market 
development;
b. Identify and promote domestic gas market development projects;
c. Gain more value from international downstream LNG markets;
d. Pursue a project-based and market-opportunity approach, rather than 
centrally-planned national model;
e. Identify and develop clusters for gas resource, infrastructure and gasbased industrialisation;
f. Develop and implement a gas-for-development programme, 
encouraging gas for smaller-scale projects;
g. Take steps to ensure rapid growth of the LPG market, including 
reviewing effectiveness of NPMC as a market leader/maker;
h. Investigate, develop and gain access to regional African gas markets;
i. Set a suitable environment for financing of gas projects.
6. Developing National Human Resources:
a. Develop Nigerian content and implement Nigerian Content Act;
b. Build institutional capacity;
c. Introduce a maintenance and safety culture.7. Communications: Internal and external communications strategy;
8. Roadmap and Action Plan: 
a. Action plan for short term (months); 
b. Implementation Plan for medium term (1-2 years);
c. Implementation Plan for long term (over two years).

#2. INTRODUCTION
#2.1. Statement of the Gas Policy
This policy document builds on the policy goals of the Federal Government for the gas 
sector as presented in the 7 Big Wins initiative (www.7Bigwins.com) developed by the
Ministry of Petroleum Resources and the National Economic Recovery & Growth Plan 
(ERGP 2017 – 2020).
The Policy articulates the vision of the Federal Government of Nigeria, sets goals, 
strategies and proposes an implementation plan for the introduction of an appropriate 
institutional, legal, regulatory and commercial framework for the gas sector. It is 
intended to remove the barriers affecting investment and development in the sector. 
The policy will be reviewed and updated periodically to ensure consistency in 
Government policy objectives at all times.
Government shall abide by the provisions of this policy unless and until reviewed or 
replaced by a formal restatement of policy duly gazetted by the Government. 
#2.2. Definition of Gas for the Policy
Although the definitions set out in this policy are indicative, the policy is clear that the 
upstream, midstream and downstream segments will be clearly separated. Detailed 
definitions of gas and the parts of the value chain will be set out in legislation.
distinguish
Petroleum is defined to cover all petroleum related products, including crude oil, 
petroleum products and other derivatives of crude oil, natural gas, and various gas 
liquids and condensates. The complementary petroleum policy document 
concentrates on oil and oil products while gas is covered by this Gas Policy document.
The parts of the gas value chain, for the purposes of the Gas Policy, are defined as 
follows:
Upstream: Activities related to:
• Exploration for, development and production of gas;
• Drilling and operation of gas producing wells;
• Construction and operation of gas gathering pipelines;
• Gas separation and treatment facilities and operations;
• Transportation of personnel and equipment to and from upstream gas
locations and facilities. 
Midstream: Activities related to:
• Construction and operation of gas transportation pipelines, in general after 
the flow station;
• Gas processing facilities;
• Natural gas liquefaction plants;
• Gas bulk storage facilities;
• Shipping of gas and related products;
• Other bulk transport methods, such as rail, barge and trucks for transporting 
gas and related products on a wholesale basis.
Downstream: Activities related to:
• Construction and operation of facilities for distributing gas to customers;
• Retail stations for CNG;
• City gate reception terminals for gas;
• Distribution of gas;
• Wholesale marketing of gas and gas products;
• Marketing, retailing and sale of gas.
The reasons for the clear separation of the segments of the gas value chain are:
• For fiscal reasons (dealt with in the complementary Petroleum Fiscal Policy);
• To enable market entry and access for new entrants and investors.
A clear separation and distinction between the upstream and the midstream will 
provide a level playing field between incumbents and new entrants, ensure clarity in 
midstream regulation, and will provide a basis for ending the practice of consolidation 
of midstream costs against upstream tax liabilities.

#2.3. Background
Nigeria – A Gas Play and not an Oil Play
The most dominant natural resource in Nigeria is natural gas. With proven gas 
reserves of 188 trillion cubic feet (tcf) of gas and the 9th largest gas reserves in the 
world, Nigeria has more gas reserves than oil. 
Though Nigeria can be regarded as a gas province with some oil in it, little effort has 
been made to undertake exploration for gas. As a result, a significant proportion of 
Nigeria’s gas was discovered incidentally during exploration for oil. 
In 2015, gas production was just 29% of oil production and reserves production ratios 
were 46 years for oil against 102 years for gas (reserves production ratio is a measure 
of how strenuously reserves are being exploited).

Prior to 2014 and barring 2009, Nigeria was exposed to a very benign international 
environment, with high gas prices, strong global demand for gas and LNG, and large 
flows of investment looking for opportunities in emerging markets for gas-based 
industrialisation (such as petrochemicals, methanol, fertilisers).
Those benign times have now passed and the international business environment is 
now much tougher. International gas prices have fallen, and huge new volumes of gas 
and LNG supplies are coming on-stream globally against reduced forecasts of market 
demand growth. 
Nigeria will struggle to compete with the large gas supply volumes about to enter the 
East Asian markets. North America is closed as a gas importer. European gas 
demand is depressed and may remain so in the future as the continent increasingly 
turns to renewable energy. South American gas markets are growing but are relatively 
small and LNG supplies are currently dominated by Trinidad & Tobago. 
Meanwhile, global investment flows have moved away from emerging markets and 
back to developed economies. Even within Africa, Nigeria is competing for investment 
with Southern and Eastern Africa. Nigeria now needs to work hard to survive in the constrained economic 
environment the country now finds itself in.

From 2008 to 2015 the policy of the Government was to harness Nigeria’s vast gas 
resources based on the GMP, which outlined the objectives and aspirations of the 
Nation with respect to its gas resources. However, with minimal investments made in 
the gas sector over the period, the Plan has not delivered on all its set targets. For 
example, Nigeria still lacks critical gas infrastructure and continues to fall short of 
domestic gas supply obligations. 
Objectives of Government
The Federal Government has historically invested more in and derived greater 
revenue from oil rather than gas. It is however recognised that the natural linkages of 
the gas sector to the electricity, industrial, agricultural and transportation sectors 
present the single most important opportunity for rapidly accelerating the nation’s 
industrial development and economic recovery.
Government will leverage its large gas portfolio to ensure that 
gas development is undertaken in accordance with Nigeria’s 
national socio-economic development priorities.
Gas Legislation
The existing petroleum legislation (Petroleum Act of 1969, Cap P.10 LFN 2004) was
enacted more for oil with inadequate provisions for gas as a hydrocarbon and an 
industry in its own right. It also did not provide for the development of a midstream 
and downstream gas industry.
A Downstream Gas Bill was drafted in 2005 and was subsequently incorporated into 
the Petroleum Industry Bill (PIB). The main thrust of the Downstream Gas Bill and the 
gas provisions of the PIB was to develop a regulatory and commercial framework to 
support the growth of a downstream domestic gas market.
Gas Master Plan 
In 2008 the Federal Government of Nigeria approved the implementation of the GMP. 
The GMP acknowledged that there was a strategic window of opportunity for Nigeria 
to establish itself as a major LNG exporting nation and for gas-based industrialisation. 
The GMP emphasised the following: 
I. The Infrastructure Blueprint
The Infrastructure Blueprint was the heart of the GMP. It mapped out the 
planned infrastructure needed, including connecting the gas networks in the 
western and eastern parts of the country, building new transport pipelines from 
the south to Ajaokuta Steel, on to Abuja and then to the northernmost reaches 
of the country. The first part of the infrastructure required the construction of 
Central Processing Facilities (CPFs) in the Niger Delta region to process wet 
gas for supply to onshore gas transportation networks and industrial plants. Almost 590km of pipelines have been completed and commissioned further to 
the GMP. These pipelines include:

• Oben-Geregu (196km)
• Expansion of Escravos-Warri-Oben (110km) 
• Emuren-Itoki (50km)
• Itoki-Olorunshogo (31km)
• Imo River-Alaoji (24km)
• Ukanafun-Calabar (128km)
• NOPL (50km) 
With these projects now in place, all available power plants in the country today 
are connected to permanent gas supply pipelines. In addition, there is ongoing 
construction of the strategic East-West OB3 pipeline (127km) scheduled for 
completion by the end of 2017 and the expansion of the Escravos-Lagos Gas 
Pipeline System scheduled for completion by Q1 2017. The technical 
evaluation for the Trans Nigeria Gas Pipeline (1400km) has also been 
completed. 

II. Domestic Gas Supply Obligation (DSO)
A Domestic Gas Supply Obligation (DSO) was introduced to address 
challenges in gas supply into the domestic market and provide a pricing path 
for wholesale gas supply to downstream offtakers. The DSO was to be broken 
down to an annual delivery obligation (i.e., delivery to the nearest gas 
transmission infrastructure) on all gas producers, with the sum of all obligations 
equalling the planned domestic requirement for gas.
III. Commercial Framework (Pricing Policy)
The National Domestic Gas Supply & Pricing Regulations was issued in 2008,
proposing different prices for different consumer groups. All suppliers were to 
be paid an Aggregate Domestic Gas Price. A Strategic Aggregator (Gas 
Aggregation Company of Nigeria, GACN) was then established to manage the 
implementation of the DSO and the aggregate price.


Results from the Previous Policy
While the gas market has grown over the last ten years, it has been very slow, at 3.1% 
a year, only just keeping up with national population growth (2.8% according to the 
World Bank). In other words, gas supply per head has barely changed over the last
ten years and has not met economic growth needs. 
Nigeria is now experiencing a full-blown energy crisis in spite 
of its abundant gas resources. A new gas policy that is more 
effective and adjusted for the much harsher international 
business environment for gas is now required to drive the 
institutional reforms and regulatory changes necessary to 
attract investment into the sector.

International Perspectives
Oil and Gas Price Movements
There are two key messages:
i. The Period of High Prices Now Over 
Global Oil and Gas prices for the ten years preceding 2016 have been the highest 
they have ever been since the 1860s when the modern petroleum industry first started. 
Price levels have now fallen substantially from those levels and there is a possibility 
that they may not reach those levels again.
As oil supply reduces, there may be a window of oil prices of around $85/bbl in the 
period 2020-2030. Prices are forecast to fall again after that window and then stay 
low. At the same time, while oil supply increases dramatically as US shale oil comes 
back onstream, demand growth will markedly soften, except for the petrochemicals 
sector which is likely to be the main market for oil. These oil price movements will 
affect gas prices as well. 
The clear message for Nigeria is that it must broaden the economy 
beyond oil.
ii. Recent Extreme Price Volatility
There has also been extreme volatility of oil and gas prices since around 2005, at 
levels not seen since the 1860s.
Meanwhile, Japanese prices were affected by two factors: 1) the linkage to oil prices 
led gas prices to rise as oil prices rose; and 2) the closure of Japanese nuclear plants 
following Fukushima led to increased Japanese demand for gas. 
But as oil prices fell, the opposite effect happened. Japanese gas prices came close
to parity with European gas prices (UK National Balancing Point, NBP and German 
import prices) in May 2015, and on a couple of occasions, actually fell below the 
European levels. Price differentials between Japanese and European gas prices have 
now reverted to their traditional approximately one third premium.

Price Risk of China Shale Gas
A major threat and perhaps the biggest price risk to LNG and international gas prices 
over the long run could be if shale gas is developed in China. Beyond the potential for 
shale gas production from China’s Tarim basin, the possibility of China ceasing to 
become a gas importer at the same time as massive new supplies of LNG in the 
Pacific basin come on line (within the next five to ten years) would probably lead to 
dramatic falls in LNG prices across the world, with prices staying low for a very long 
time.

Atlantic and Pacific Basins
In LNG terms, the world is basically in two basins, Atlantic and Pacific, with Africa 
dividing the two. The two basins operate differently, with different suppliers and 
markets, and different contractual terms. Due to LNG boil off over time as well as
freight and insurance costs, LNG from one basin is generally uncompetitive in the 
other. 


Figure 4: A Mountain of New Supplies over the Next 5 years
Asia Pacific was the major market for Nigeria LNG in 2015. But with two major 
exporters (Qatar and Australia) and the huge new volumes about to supply the same 
region, Nigerian LNG will probably struggle for market penetration in the future.
Nigeria is naturally an Atlantic basin supplier. There certainly have been and will 
continue to be Nigerian LNG deliveries to Pacific basin markets but they are unlikely 
to be major markets for Nigeria, as there are actual and potential major LNG producers 
geographically closer to East Asian markets (including Qatar, Abu Dhabi, Tanzania, 
Mozambique, Indonesia, Malaysia, Australia and so on).


Pacific Basin
Australia: Australia currently is 
the second largest exporter of 
LNG and is expected to overtake 
Qatar as the world’s largest 
exporter when seven LNG 
projects totalling 57.6 mtpa,
which are currently under 
construction are commissioned 
between 2016 and 2017. They 
are expected to enter the Asia 
pacific market, which currently 
takes all of Australia’s LNG 
exports
These volumes of LNG are more than twice the total volume of Nigeria’s LNG export 
or liquefaction capacity. 

Mozambique: Mozambique has emerged as the second largest gas reserves holder 
in Africa following offshore discoveries made since 2009. It is aggressively developing 
plans to commercialise its gas resource. Development of four LNG trains is ongoing 
with future plans for up to ten trains. 
Tanzania: Tanzania has also made some considerable offshore gas discoveries, with 
contingent resources estimated at 29 tcf and possible resources up to 50 tcf. In the 
medium term, BG and Statoil are developing two LNG trains, with plans to increase to 
four trains in the long term. Mozambique and Tanzania are both developing the same Rovuma basin which 
crosses the border between the two countries. Mozambique and Tanzania each pose 
considerable competition for Nigerian LNG for Asian markets (East Asia, South Asia 
and the Middle East), even more so when both schemes are considered together. 
Papua New Guinea: Papua New Guinea joined the league of LNG exporting 
countries by bringing in LNG supply from Yemen (another LNG exporting nation). The 
Papua New Guinea LNG project has been exporting LNG to Southeast Asia since 
2014, producing 6.9 mtpa from 2015, with an estimated production of more than 9 tcf
of gas over the project lifetime. 
Indonesia: Indonesia is cutting down on its gas export obligations as a result of 
attempts to meet domestic energy demand. SKK Migas, the country’s upstream oil 
and gas regulator, has said that domestic commitments and consumption will continue 
to grow, which means an increasing gas allocation for domestic use and reducing 
volumes of gas available for export.
Malaysia: While Indonesia is cutting down on LNG exports, Malaysia is still 
aggressively committed to increasing its LNG supplies for domestic markets (coastal 
regions and islands) and exports. Malaysia is the fourth largest natural gas reserves 
holder in the Asia-Pacific region, and accounts for 10% of total world LNG exports. 
Japan Methane Hydrates: The Japanese government has succeeded in extracting 
samples of a next-generation resource, methane hydrate, from the bottom of the Sea 
of Japan. It is estimated that there is enough methane hydrate beneath coastal waters 
to meet the nation’s natural gas needs for 100 years. This is a long-term prospect, 
however, as the technology to extract methane hydrate is far from commercialisation. 
There are also concerns about environmental damage linked to extraction, partially 
because methane is a powerful greenhouse gas. 


With such huge streams of LNG and pipeline gas coming into the market over the next 
few years to the Asian region, the oversupply will continue to bring pressures on LNG and gas prices, and suppliers will have to settle for buyers conditions in changing 
contract agreements (with probably a continuing move towards ever shorter contract 
terms). In addition, a buyers’ cartel may build up among Asian LNG buyers, further 
complicated by the emergence of Singapore as an LNG hub.
Because of its distance from the market, Nigerian LNG will struggle to be 
competitive in Asian LNG markets in the future.
Atlantic Basin
Nigerian LNG markets realistically lie in the Atlantic basin, to North America, South 
America and Europe. All of these however present challenges to Nigeria.
North America: Since the shale gas revolution, North America is no longer a market 
for LNG, as it has become self-sufficient in gas, and has become an LNG exporter.
South America: South America has growing gas markets and can be a market for 
Nigerian LNG, particularly to Brazil and Argentina. Supplies from Nigeria are at a 
similar distance from Atlantic Coast and South American markets as are supplies from 
Trinidad & Tobago which currently provides most of the LNG supply to South America. 
Nigeria would have to play catch-up to be able to access those markets. While South 
American LNG markets are growing, they are still probably not large enough to be 
able to accommodate significant LNG supplies from both Nigeria and Trinidad & 
Tobago. Trinidad & Tobago has a declining resource base however and is finding it 
harder to fulfil its supply obligations. 



Europe
Gas demand in Europe remains lower than forecast when NLNG Trains 1-6 were 
commissioned. There are several factors supporting the view that European gas 
demand may stay low for the foreseeable future.One is the state of the Eurozone economies. Eight years after the financial crisis, 
southern European economic growth remains low (while northern European 
economies are growing strongly). Europe (southern Europe at least) may be entering 
a period similar to what was called “the lost decade” in Japan, where despite many 
government fiscal stimuli, the economy remained stagnant. The short and possibly 
medium term uncertainty surrounding Brexit will only exacerbate European economic 
growth concerns.
Northern European economies, which are growing well, have abundant gas supplies. 
Even though the UK has turned from being a net gas exporter to now being a (small) 
net gas importer, there are abundant gas supplies in Norway, with pipeline supplies 
across the North Sea, and indeed Norwegian LNG exports (in particular the Snøvit 
field LNG liquefaction offshore northern Norway); and nearby in Russia (with 
Shtockman LNG in the Barents Sea off northern Russia).
There are other LNG markets in the periphery of Europe, such as Turkey, which has 
received some Nigerian LNG supplies, or Egypt, which has also turned from being a 
gas exporter to a gas importer. Gas markets in the Eastern Mediterranean are likely 
to be small, however, as gas resources are also being developed in the region.


Power Generation in Europe
Another threat potentially reducing LNG demand in Europe is the drive towards 
renewable energy. Europe has turned a corner where renewable energy has now 
become mainstream across Europe. Europe is reducing its reliance on thermal energy 
of all sorts.
The growth in electricity generated from renewable sources during the period 2003 to 
2013 largely reflects an expansion of wind turbines, solar power and biomass, 
although hydropower remained the single largest source for renewable electricity 
generated in the EU-28. Other Factors Supporting Gas in Europe
Two general trends across Western Europe are the decommissioning of ageing coal 
plants and the move away from nuclear power. Germany has taken a policy to move 
away completely from nuclear power. The UK and France are committed to continuing 
nuclear power generation but both countries are encountering technical and financial 
problems. The result is that there is likely to be a continuing role for gas for power 
generation in Europe, to replace coal generation and to take up the slack that new 
nuclear power will not be able to meet. 
Commoditisation of LNG
Costs of LNG liquefaction, shipping and regasification in particular have been falling 
steadily over the years. LNG used to be differentiated as a high-priced product in 
Europe; however, LNG is now rapidly becoming a commodity which can be sold all 
year round into European markets (provided the price is low enough) but it may be 
losing its winter pricing premium.
Another important trend is that the long term contract of twenty, thirty or even forty
years is giving way to shorter contract periods of five years or less. The commodity 
nature of LNG will be plain to see if LNG spot trades become common. 
Potential African Gas Markets
Perhaps Nigeria could help develop and then supply African gas markets with LNG 
and pipeline gas. The West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP) could be extended further 
west to neighbouring countries; gas pipeline connections could perhaps be made to 
Cameroon (although Cameroon has its own domestic gas reserves which are right 
next to the main industrial markets); or Nigerian LNG could be taken to other markets 
along the west African coast. While these developments are all possible, the window 
of opportunity is limited because:
1. Gas export projects take considerable time to develop;
2. Countries with potential markets such as Cote d’Iviore are beginning to 
contract LNG form other supply sources;
3. Africa may decide to skip the fossil fuel stage as Africa develops, and go 
straight to mass renewable power generation along the lines of Europe.
Investment Flows
Global Investment Flows
From 2008, the developed economies suffered and investments into western markets 
fell dramatically. After a small initial fall, from 2009, investment flows to emerging 
markets increased strongly, until around 2013. As developed economies recover, 
investment flows to emerging markets are now flat or slightly declining, while the major 
investment flows are returning to developed western economies. The growth period 
for investments into emerging markets has now ended. Of emerging markets, most of the investment flows went to Asia and only a small 
proportion to Africa. Within Africa, investment is now moving away from Nigeria to 
more attractive opportunities in East Africa (Mozambique, Tanzania and Kenya) and 
South Africa.
Investment Flows to Nigeria
Investment flows into Nigeria are declining and some existing investments are leaving 
the country for more favourable investment destinations, such as Mozambique, 
Tanzania, Kenya, and South Africa.
Nigeria's appeal has faded as the price of oil, the source of up to 80% of export 
earnings, has declined. Growth fell to 2.8% last year, the slowest since 1999, and is 
forecast to slow again, to 2%, in 2016 (source: Morgan Stanley). In US Dollar terms, 
the economy in 2019 will still be 17% smaller than its 2014 peak of $542 bn. 
In Conclusion: Nigeria has a Challenging Future
In conclusion, Nigeria faces some significant market challenges in the future for its 
LNG exports. It is likely that Nigerian LNG supplies will be able to find markets, but 
price discounting will likely become the norm. Nigeria will also have to work much 
harder in the future to market its LNG.


#2.4. Challenges Facing Nigeria Presently
Nigeria is currently facing significant challenges. The easy days of past years, when 
the country enjoyed a very benign international environment with high prices and 
growing markets, have passed.
These challenges include:
• International Environment:
o Low and volatile gas price;
o Low demand for LNG;
o Increasing competition of supplies into the global market;
o Commoditisation of LNG;
o Power shifting from producer to buyer;
o Tipping point reached for renewable energy.
• Domestic Environment:
; Security of supply risks:
; Gas supply restrictions for domestic gas projects;
; Challenges in funding of NNPC’s cash call obligations in upstream 
projects;
; Growing gas payment arrears in the power sector;
; Militancy and insurgency.
o Absence of enabling environment to attract foreign direct investment (FDI):
Slow progress with Nigerian gas export projects;
Slow pace of domestic gas projects;
Inadequate gas supply for the domestic market;Financing challenges from local financial institutions;
Re-direction of FDI focus from Nigeria to other regions;
Slow implementation of key infrastructure projects envisaged in the 
GMP.
o Governance:
There is a vast gulf of understanding between the private and 
public sectors (especially between government and the IOCs);
Need for increased transparency and adherence to due process in 
business transactions;
Conflicts of interest in Government as policy maker, legislator, 
regulator and commercial participant;
NNPC in transmission and wholesale gas transactions.
o Legislation: 
Petroleum law designed for crude oil not for gas;
Gas not recognised as a commodity in its own right;
Lack of coverage of downstream gas in legislation;
Laws scattered, sometimes overlapping and opaque.
o Regulation:
Several regulatory agencies with overlapping roles, while other 
roles are unregulated;
Functionally weak agencies;
Long and tortuous regulatory processes;
High transaction costs for investors.
o Sector structure:
Natural monopoly elements combined with potentially competitive 
elements;
Potential for competition constrained by existing sector structure;
Conflicts of interest at various points.
o Weaknesses in the wider supply chain and with skills development:
Too few people who are sufficiently qualified and skilled;
An inefficient supply value chain driving up costs and inhibiting
investment projects.

#2.5. The Need for a New Gas Policy
Nigeria needs a new gas policy that fits the severely constrained 
circumstances in which the nation now finds itself. The gas policy 
must work for Nigerians and must be faithfully implemented to meet 
the vision outlined in this document.
Government will leverage its large gas portfolio to ensure that gas 
development is undertaken in accordance with Nigeria’s national 
socio-economic development priorities.

#3. VISION AND OBJECTIVES
3.1. Vision
“To be an attractive gas-based industrial nation, giving primary 
attention to meeting local gas demand requirements, and 
developing a significant presence in international markets”.
This Vision for Nigerian gas contains key aspirations:
1. Move the economy from oil to gas;
2. Diversify the gas supply options within Nigeria, to ensure security of supply;
3. Extend gas penetration in the domestic market in order to facilitate the growth 
of the electric power, agricultural, industrial and transportation sectors;
4. Gain a presence for Nigerian gas in international markets;
5. Operate a gas industry with a clear division of roles between private and public 
sectors:
o Public sector policy making; implementation and regulation;
o Private sector investment and operations;
6. End gas flaring and address environmental issues;
7. Provide an enabling environment for increased private sector participation in 
the gas sector;
8. Clarify the rules guiding investment in the gas sector.
3.2. Mission
“To move Nigeria from a crude oil export-based economy to an 
attractive oil and gas-based industrial economy”
Realisation of these lofty objectives will depend on the successful implementation of 
the following:
1. Set clear gas policies;
2. Establish a clear legal and regulatory framework;
3. Communicate the vision to government agencies, local and international 
stakeholders;
4. Ensure security of gas supply through:
o developing new gas supply resources;
o installing an optimal infrastructure network;
5. Provide an attractive climate for investment;
6. Seek value addition in downstream high value international and national 
markets;
7. Direct low-cost gas for domestic markets;
8. Realign the public sector to provide policy, legal and regulatory support to the 
industry;
9. Introduce international best practice in operations and in governance;10.Ensure that operations are conducted in an environmentally clean manner.


3.3. Strategic Objectives of the Gas Policy
In order to meet the Vision and Mission, strategic objectives of the gas policy have 
been defined as follows:
1. Communicate the vision and the gas policy internally and externally;
2. Identify new gas resources, grow reserves and diversify gas supplies, from:
o Niger Delta;
o Offshore;
o Inland basins;
3. Gas flare out;
4. Establish a clear policy, institutional, legal and regulatory framework:
o Gas policy;
o Gas legislation;
o Regulatory authority;
o Secondary legislation (regulation);
5. Enable a conducive environment for investors and for market growth:
o Clear, consistent and investor friendly legal and regulatory framework;
o Investment promotion;
o Support for the development of supporting infrastructure;
o Fiscal environment that supports investment and domestic growth;
o Willing investors provided with accelerated access to gas resources;
6. Discourage wasteful projects whilst encouraging optimisation amongst 
resource owners; for example, through joint development of gas discoveries 
and infrastructure among several licensees if such developments would yield 
an economic project;
7. Seek value addition through:
o Linkages to the power, industrial, agriculture, transportation and other 
strategic sectors;
o Gas based industrialisation;
o Downstream high value export markets;
8. Develop Nigerian human resources in the petroleum sector:
o International training;
o Improved national petroleum education;
o Development of competency through education and practical 
experience, such as apprenticeship schemes;
o Graduate training;
o Technical, Vocational, Educational Training (TVET);
9. Implement international best practice in operations, particularly in 
maintenance, health and safety;10.Implement good governance throughout the industry:
11.Cluster development of gas infrastructure.

#3.4. Strategic Elements of the Gas Policy
These objectives as described above are now described in detail through the rest of 
this gas policy document. The objectives are addressed under each of several policy 
areas or themes: 
1. Governance;
2. Industry Structure;
3. Developing Gas Resources;
4. Infrastructure;
5. Building Gas Markets;
6. Developing National Human Resources;
7. Communications;
8. Roadmap and Action Plan.
In order to achieve the successful achievement of the strategic objectives and the 
elements, the Ministry of Petroleum Resources will work with the National Assembly, 
States, other Federal MDAs such as the Ministries of Power, Environment, Finance, 
Budget & National planning, Agriculture, Industry, Trade & Investment,
Transportation, and Justice and the CBN.

#4. GOVERNANCE
4.1. Strategic Objectives of the Legal and Regulatory Framework
The main Petroleum Industry legislation in Nigeria, the Petroleum Act, Cap P.10 LFN 
2004, did not legislate for gas as a hydrocarbon and industry in its own right, nor for a 
midstream and downstream gas industry. This has posed a challenge to the 
development of the gas sector and the attainment of national aspirations for gasbased industrialisation.
The government will pass new legislation to address gas issues, 
remove the anomalies and distinguish the up, mid and 
downstream.
The main aspects to be addressed under a new legislation on gas shall reflect:
• Emphasis on gas as a fuel in its own right, rather than a by-product of oil 
production;
• Separation of upstream from the midstream;
• Greater focus on the development of the midstream and downstream 
segments;
• Separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations from gas trading;
• Pricing;
• Competition regulation;
• Fiscal regime;
• Licensing of different activities in the gas chain:
o Exploration;
o Production;
o Wholesale gas supply;
o Gas processing;
o Gas Storage
o Gas transportation;
o Gas network operation;
o Gas distribution;
o Retail trading of gas.
4.2. Institutional Framework
Background
The thrust of the policy is to introduce institutional reforms capable of translating 
aspirations into results. Currently, the existing policy and regulatory institutions 
overseeing the oil and gas industry in Nigeria are:
• Ministry of Petroleum Resources;
• Department of Petroleum Resources;
• Nigeria Content Development and Monitoring Board
• Petroleum Products Pricing Regulatory Agency;
• Petroleum Equalisation Fund.Institutional Capacity Strengthening
The Federal Government is determined to strengthen the capacity of the 
Ministry of Petroleum Resources as a policy making institution. 
Towards these objectives, the policy making and surveillance capability of the Ministry 
of Petroleum Resources will be strengthened, new technical resources will be 
introduced, existing departments will be restructured, and additional mandates would 
be assigned.

Scope of Regulation
A simplified licensing regime will be introduced for every activity, including but not 
limited to constructing and operating gas processing plants, liquefaction plants, gas 
storage facilities, transportation pipelines, transportation network operation, 
distribution networks; wholesale gas supply; and retail trading of gas.
Single Independent Petroleum Regulatory Authority
The government is desirous of reducing the current regulatory overlaps and 
consolidating the existing regulatory authorities into a single petroleum regulatory 
authority. 
The Federal Government is determined that there should be a new 
single independent regulatory authority for the petroleum sector in 
Nigeria, which will replace the existing regulatory agencies. 
The new regulatory authority will cover the whole petroleum sector, incorporate the 
activities of the existing petroleum regulatory authorities and also cover some new 
regulatory activities not currently covered. It will essentially be responsible for the 
economic and technical regulation of the gas sector and shall have licensing, 
investigative, monitoring and dispute mediation powers. 
The following Divisions, Departments or functions are envisaged to form parts of the 
new petroleum regulatory authority, among others:
1. Upstream oil and gas regulation;
2. Midstream and downstream gas regulation;
3. Midstream and downstream oil regulation;
4. Health, safety and environment compliance;
5. Consumer protection;
6. Compliance monitoring.


The government is aware that while there are many benefits in consolidating into a 
single petroleum regulatory authority (and reducing the current number of disparate 
and sometime overlapping regulatory agencies), there are also some challenges. The 
main challenge is likely to be in transitioning the current agencies into a cohesive new 
regulatory institution. This will require building institutional capacity and a strong and 
effective corporate culture within the new institutions, to ensure effectiveness of the 
institutional framework and sustainability of the policy.

Petroleum Safety Compliance
The current system in Nigeria regarding maintenance, health, safety and environment 
in the Petroleum Sector needs to be brought to a higher standard. Major safety 
incidents go without proper investigation and without responsible parties being held 
sufficiently accountable.
This policy places emphasis on prevention and conclusive investigation as well as 
appropriate sanctions.
• Lessons should be learned, changes made and similar incidents avoided in the 
future;
• If individuals are culpable, they should face criminal prosecution, setting a 
deterrent to people.
The safety record for gas and LPG in Nigeria is unlikely to significantly improve without 
establishing and empowering the regulator to carry out forensic investigations and to 
lay criminal prosecutions where necessary.
A strong robust safety regulator will be established, with powers of 
inspection and investigation, and working with law enforcement 
agencies as necessary for entry into premises without owner’s 
permission, removal of evidence, questioning under caution and 
detention, in accordance with the law.
The policy is for safety regulations to include robust penalties for 
breaches of regulations and safety standards. There also needs to 
be criminal prosecution for instances of gross negligence or wilful 
misconduct that lead to a serious breach of health and safety
standards or serious incidents that lead to loss of life. They should 
carry a potential jail sentence for Directors of offending companies. 
A key safety regulatory function therefore is the monitoring and inspections regime.
Inspections: Preventive monitoring and inspections to ensure licensees are 
acting within regulation (before-the-incident prevention, ex-ante);
• Investigations: Major incident investigations, where forensic investigations of 
incidents take place (after-the-incident investigations, ex-post), gathering 
evidence so that:
o lessons can be learned for the future; and
o criminal prosecutions can be made, if necessary in instances of gross 
negligence or wilful misconduct. 
The petroleum safety division of the new regulator will be dedicated to the safety 
regulation of all operations in the petroleum sector. However, it is recognised that such 
an organisation needs to be properly financed and needs to have specialist staff with 
the skills and the tools to carry out their work effectively.

Technical Standards
Around the world, technical standards are usually developed by the industry in 
consultation. Standards are produced by technical standards committees of the 
Industry association which are made up of representatives of the industry. 
Nigeria will adopt appropriate international standards selected, whichever is more 
stringent, from ISO, ASME, EI, API, ASTM, ANSI, for example. Pipeline design 
standards can be from, for example: ISO, ASME, EI, API, IGEM.
The new petroleum regulatory authority will be responsible for technical standards in 
Nigeria. 
The Standards Division of the Petroleum Regulatory Authority will be 
responsible for developing and maintaining technical standards, working 
with industry. 
Metering and Measurement
The state of metering and measurement of hydrocarbons is not 
satisfactory. As part of arrangements for a transparently run industry, the 
policy is that shortcomings in metering, measurement and fiscalisation 
of hydrocarbons throughout the value chain will be addressed.
Cost Monitoring and Control
The costs of running the overall petroleum industry in Nigeria have risen dramatically 
to an unacceptable level. Nigeria has become one of the highest cost provinces in the 
world. 
The intention of the policy is to avoid duplication of and unnecessary 
costs, and to avoid redundant and underutilised assets. It is the policy of 
the Government that robust cost estimation and cost control must be 
adopted as a standard operating practice in the sector.
The petroleum regulator in implementing the intention of the policy will approve a 
duplication of infrastructure assets only if an economic case can be put forward. 
Measures to reduce costs in the Nigerian gas industry should include (among other 
measures):
• Cost estimates prepared for any project must be benchmarked across the 
industry and with peer projects globally.
• An evaluation of the technical and economic feasibility of any engineering 
project must be undertaken before proceeding with such project 
• Approved cost data for all projects should be recorded in the National Cost 
Database developed under the leadership of the Commission.
• Cost optimisation and efficiency of operations through joint developments,
consolidation of contracts where necessary and better asset management;
• Performance-based incentives that reward lower cost producers and penalise
higher cost producers;• A general move away from higher cost gas;
• Sharing of services and facilities;
• Contract thresholds for projects.
The government is also very aware of the measures it needs to take to help to produce 
a lower cost environment, including among others:
• Resolving the Niger Delta militancy issues;
• Reducing the general costs of doing business in Nigeria;
• Introducing efficiencies into local content contractor procurement; 
• Optimising contracting cycles.

Consumer Protection
A consumer representation and protection body will be established, with the mandate 
of representing mainly residential and small business consumers against more 
powerful corporate or government interests. 
The regulator shall prescribe and communicate a consumer 
protection standard for the gas sector.
National Petroleum Policy Directorate
For sustainability and effective monitoring and implementation of 
policy, specialist centres shall be established within the MPR, in 
addition to the existing technical departments.
To ensure a more effective role, a National Petroleum Policy Directorate, which will 
act as a technical back office of the Minister in his policy making role, will be 
established within the MPR along with the following specialist centres:
1. Oil Policy Division with departments for the Upstream, Midstream and 
Downstream;
2. Gas Policy Division with departments for the Upstream, Midstream and 
Downstream;
3. Strategic Planning and Policy Research Centre;
4. The Investment Promotion Office.


Strategic Planning and Policy Research Centre
The Strategic Planning and Policy Research Centre shall keep 
regular track of local and international developments and keep 
Ministry, Regulator and other government institutions updated as 
necessary.
The Strategic Planning and Policy Research Centre will be a small research centre 
responsible for tracking developments such as:
• Strategic planning and natural resource management issues;
• Petroleum industry market developments;
• Oil and gas price movements and forecasts;
• Policy initiatives;
• Regulatory initiatives;
• Developments in international energy organisations;
• Key international contacts with whom leaders within the MPR need to keep in 
contact.
Investment Promotion Office
It will be useful and helpful to investors to have a single point of first contact where 
they can find out about Nigeria and about the investment opportunities in the 
petroleum sector. Any potential investor should be given as much information as 
possible, in as investor friendly a manner as possible, about all the opportunities. 
While it is not possible to give confidential information about competitors or other 
companies, the Ministry should be able to produce authoritative estimates of reserves, 
of markets, of opportunities for investment, of legal and fiscal conditions, and any other 
information that can be provided.The Investment Promotion Office will provide:
• Technical support in promoting a project;
• A centre of expertise on upstream and downstream petroleum opportunities 
within Nigeria that will work with the Nigeria Investment Promotion Council 
(NIPC);
• A database of projects and investment opportunities;
• An informative website;
• Support with promotions and roadshows;
• Dedicated personnel to help potential investors, so that investors have a single 
point of contact who will remain with them and guide them through the 
government process.
The Investment Promotion Office should have a website with as much information as 
possible on it. In addition, rather than just waiting for potential investors to approach 
it, the Investment Promotion Office could also actively promote the opportunities in 
Nigeria and prospective projects to potential developers through promotions, 
presentations and road shows.
National Gas Focal Point
The National Gas Focal Point shall be a Senior person in the Ministry charged with 
oversight on the practical implementation of the gas policy, overcoming any obstacles 
and ensuring consensus and a coordinated development among all the participants.
Dedicated Project Desks
To facilitate institutionalised implementation of the programmes and projects
emanating from the policy, the dedicated “Project Desks” within the Oil and Gas Policy 
Divisions will serve as Interface between project developers and Government 
Agencies. 
The Project desks will not duplicate the activities of other departments or agencies of 
the Government or the regulator. Instead, their role essentially will be to lobby and 
push projects or programmes provided for or relevant to the Gas Policy through 
Government. Their job will be to engage and fully involve other parts of Government 
and the private sector to ensure that projects or programmes are implemented.
Joint Stakeholder Forum
In addition to the specialist centres to be established within MPR for the monitoring 
and implementation of policy, a Joint Stakeholder Forum shall be established. The 
joint stakeholder forum shall consist of representatives of the main stakeholder groups 
meeting on a regular basis to address cross-cutting issues on the implementation of 
the gas policy and/or specific project(s).
a. The membership of the joint stakeholder forum shall be drawn from active 
stakeholder groups in the country.b. The forum will relate with the National Gas Focal Point on matters relating to the 
implementation of the gas policy.
c. Health and safety will be a major component. Experience from other countries 
indicates that if consumers gain an impression that gas is dangerous, then market 
growth will be much slower. Ensuring a safe market development will be vital.
Donor Agencies
The government will work with the donor community to identify 
aspects of the policy where donor agency support can be secured.
Civil Society, Consumer Groups and Associations
The government will work with civil society groups, nongovernmental organisations, consumer and professional 
associations so as to ensure transparency, accountability and 
sustainability in developing the gas sector. 


#4.3. Commercial Framework
Background
The [commercial framework?] gas market development will be 
policy driven and project led, with the objective of achieving an 
integrated national gas network. 
The commercial framework consists of two key aspects:
• Rules for access to pipelines and gas networks;
• Pricing principles and regulations.
Access to Gas Networks
An important principle of the gas policy is that there will be a full 
legal separation of gas infrastructure ownership and operations, 
and trading, such that separate companies will carry out the 
different activities. These companies may be affiliated as long as 
they are operated under consistent FIRS rules for transfer pricing 
and are subject to regulatory supervision.
Gas transportation companies will not be allowed to engage directly in the purchase 
and/or sale of gas, and vice versa for trading companies, except through separate 
corporate vehicles.
For purposes of clarity, asset owners in one segment of the value chain may own and 
operate assets in different segments of the value chain if they wish, albeit under 
different legal entities. For example, a holding company may have different companies 
operating in the upstream, midstream and downstream.Distribution exclusivity: Where a project developer has developed or wishes to 
develop a distribution area, they may be granted a period of exclusivity for a limited 
period of time for sales to customers within the distribution area through an affiliate 
gas trading company. This will be such that the project developer can recover their 
costs of building up the market in the distribution area plus a reasonable rate of return.
Avoidance of duplication: As well as encouraging new entrants into the Nigerian 
gas industry, the intention of the policy is to avoid duplication of and unnecessary 
costs, and to avoid redundant and underutilised assets. The petroleum regulator in 
implementing the intention of the policy will approve a duplication of infrastructure 
assets only if an economic case can be put forward. 
Network Code
Access to all midstream facilities will be on an open access basis and a network code 
to manage access will be developed by the industry with oversight by the petroleum 
regulatory authority.
There will be open access to all pipelines and other essential 
midstream infrastructure, whether located offshore or onshore and 
the petroleum industry and government will consider the type of 
network code that is required.
The intention is for the Network Code to be simple, easily implementable and designed 
in a modular fashion so that additional elements can be added as the market develops.
Gas pipeline pressures, gas specifications, metering and other technical and 
commercial details relating to infrastructure access will be dealt with in the Network 
Code.
Pending the completion of the Network Code, effective point-topoint gas transportation agreements, with flexibility for third-party 
access, shall be the thrust of the policy.
Government and the gas industry will continue to update and 
implement the network code through constant stakeholder 
engagement to enhance market development. 
Gas Swaps
There are various commercial arrangements which market players may use to 
develop their market position, as they see fit commercially. Swaps is one example of 
these commercial arrangements. They can be useful in their place and the gas policy 
does not have a position for or against swap arrangements. 
Market players will be permitted to engage in gas swaps if they wish to do so. The 
only caveat is that they will only be allowed after the parties have met their DSO 
obligations. The gas policy does not intend to enable parties to use measures in an 
attempt to avoid their DSO obligations,Gas Pricing
The existing gas pricing framework assumes that Nigerian gas compositions are 
typically rich in natural gas liquids, and that many producers can produce low-cost gas 
at a gas transfer price of less than $1/MMbtu when adjusted for the natural gas liquids. 
Thus, the benefits of the natural gas liquids can be used to reduce the price of dry gas 
sold into the domestic market. 
The gas pricing framework will be clarified by a revised National Domestic Gas Supply 
& Pricing Regulation. 
Wholesale Gas Price Regulation
Gradual increases in wholesale gas prices over the years have helped to stimulate 
the supply of gas. However, the current regulated pricing regime is a transitional 
measure and, with the market now demonstrating a growing appetite for bilateral 
negotiations of wholesale gas supply transactions, the basis for the transition to 
market-led pricing is already in place. 
The transitional pricing framework will be retained, albeit for a short 
period, until sufficient gas supply volumes are built up and a 
sufficient gas market has been established. The policy objective is 
that wholesale gas pricing will ultimately be market-led, without gas 
price regulation, except for monopoly infrastructure. 
During the transition period, the wholesale gas price for the domestic market will 
remain subject to the Export Parity Netback Gas Price (EPP). The average export 
market price less the costs of regasification, shipping and liquefaction will be taken as 
the production price to be applied to the domestic market.
Under this approach, producers should be price indifferent as to whether they deliver 
gas for the LNG export market or the domestic Nigerian market. Combined with a 
modest DSO (discussed further below), producers will have sufficient market 
incentives to produce for the domestic market.
For the sake of clarity, the domestic gas price will be based on the EPP during the 
transition period, regardless of what the EPP may be. Once wholesale market 
conditions apply, then the domestic price will be set by the market, which may be set 
at price setting hub points.
During the transitional period, parties may engage in transactions on a willing buyer –
willing seller basis once they have met their DSO obligations.
LNG Export Tolling Price
In order to realise more of the value of the gas product from 
downstream international LNG export markets, the policy for LNG 
liquefaction facilities is that infrastructure owners will be paid a 
tolling fee by Government for liquefying, shipping and regasification of Government’s equity gas. The price and methodology are to be developed in conjunction with the industry but 
are likely to be based as much as possible on:
• Liquefaction: Cost-of-service approach using average cost benchmarks that 
recognises Nigerian circumstances whilst assuring a rate of return on actual 
costs;
• Regasification: Published or contract regasification prices at the export 
market facility;
• Shipping: Published prices, industry standard freight and insurance costs, or 
contract prices.
Cost Benchmarking for Infrastructure Facilities
Cost benchmarking is crucial to sector economics and regulatory decision-making.
A cost-of-service approach will be adopted using average, standard 
or benchmark costs that recognises Nigerian circumstances whilst 
assuring a rate of return on actual costs.
Price Publication and Monitoring
While prices are intended to be unregulated following the 
transitional period, there will nevertheless be a policy of rigorous 
price monitoring. End user prices will be required to be published 
and prices will be monitored to ensure there is no pricing abuse, 
particularly during the transitional period before the wholesale 
market is fully established.
Triggers for Wholesale Market Regime
The Minister of Petroleum Resources will declare that a wholesale 
gas market is in operation when he determines that one or more of 
the triggers as defined below have been met. Regulated pricing will 
then end (except for monopoly infrastructure facilities) and 
wholesale gas contracts will apply based on a willing-seller, willingbuyer basis. 
A wholesale market exists where there are 1) pricing reference point(s); 2) large 
volumes; 3) many buyers; and 4) many sellers. Trigger points indicating a wholesale 
gas market in operation in Nigeria include:
1. When sufficient parts of the planned national infrastructure are completed, in 
particular the OB3 pipeline which will act as a connection system between the 
eastern and western parts of the nation;
2. Sufficient gas volumes passing through the completed OB3, which is a potential 
physical point gas hub (where gas from the East can be wheeled to the Western
or Northern parts of Nigeria). Sufficient volumes are considered to be 2 bcf/d
(which is the capacity of the OB3 pipeline);3. When Oben develops as a physical point gas hub with sufficient volumes and 
hub pricing can replace regulated pricing;
4. When domestic gas volumes exceed export gas volumes (export volumes are 
currently approximately 3.6 bcfd);
5. When there are sufficient numbers of wholesale traders (sellers) and 
consumers (buyers). 
Infrastructure Tariffs
Regulated tariffs will be introduced for those monopoly 
infrastructure within the gas industry, including LNG liquefaction, 
gas processing, gas storage, transportation and distribution, in a 
manner that will provide investors the opportunity to recover all the 
eligible costs plus an adequate and reasonable return on 
investment.
A tariff methodology and model will be developed by the petroleum regulatory 
authority with input from industry. 
Power Sector
The policy drive for gas is to ensure gas supply to the power sector 
as the country’s number one priority. 
Significant incremental demand for gas will derive from the power sector, which has 
been used to low and cross-subsidised gas prices for a long time. The intention is to 
move to a wholesale market where power generators will take the market negotiated 
wholesale price.
As the power sector is the main demand sector for natural gas in Nigeria, there will be
a strong and a better coordination between the gas and power sectors than there is 
now. 
There are however prevailing risks in the power sector that require the urgent attention 
of the Government. These include:
• Power sector liquidity and payment assurances to the gas sector;
• Power transmission infrastructure limitations;
• Adequate capitalisation and funding of the bulk electricity trader.
The Government shall imminently address prevailing power sector 
risks to enable bankable gas supply arrangements to the power 
sector.


#4.4. Fiscal Framework
Government Fiscal Philosophy
A new fiscal policy and framework is proposed for the Nigerian 
petroleum sector. This is embedded in a separate and complementary National Petroleum Fiscal Policy document issued 
by the Government.
The philosophy for the fiscal framework of the gas policy is to set fiscal rules that are 
clear, transparent, globally competitive and designed to incentivise all participants. 
The role of the government is seen as not to create economic distortions that confer 
an advantage on or favour any particular party.
The purpose of the fiscal framework is to make gas standalone, 
separate from oil. Hence, gas projects will be developed based on 
their economics and not dependent on or consolidated against oil 
taxation.
Current Fiscal Structure
Currently, under the Associated Gas Framework Agreement (AGFA) (codified in 
section 11, Petroleum Profits Tax Act), AG and NAG costs can be recovered from oil 
income. 
This has led to a number of distortions:
1. It discriminates against investors without oil tax capacity (that is, it discriminates 
against companies who do not have oil operations, and therefore are unable to 
expense their gas costs against oil operations in the manner that upstream 
investors in gas projects can);
2. It incentivises oil companies to build gas infrastructure (in some cases 
unnecessarily oversized gas infrastructure) for fiscal reasons (to include in their 
cost oil base for offset against their profit oil, which ultimately is paid for by the 
Nigerian government);
3. It has meant that the only gas infrastructure not built for fiscal purposes has 
been built by the Nigerian government, via NGC; 
4. When the oil price is low (as is the situation now), tax capacity (the ability to 
collect tax on profit oil) declines.
Fiscal Rules of General Application
Fiscal Rules of General Application (FRGA) is the framework through which the 
interests of the state and that of the investor are codified. Seven main thematic areas 
that need to be addressed in the fiscal system for Nigeria are:
1. Governance – the key governing institutions of the oil and gas industry and their 
role as prescribed by the separation principle, i.e., of policy, regulation and 
commercial operations;
2. Funding of the institutions and funding of government participation in 
commercial operations;
3. Fiscal incentives for investments – the balance of risk and reward in a fiscal 
designed framework;
4. Enabling gas exploitation in Nigeria through policy regulatory and fiscal 
interventions;5. The role of the regulator the principles, powers and economics of regulation;
6. The role of the state in natural resource management – the shareholder 
responsibilities versus the requirement to meet social needs;
7. Mitigating social consequences of natural resource exploitation – best practice 
community participation.
An optimum fiscal regime is often a composite of trade-offs across different objectives:
• Early revenues vs investment efficiency;
• Progressivity 
• Competitiveness;
• Early fiscal revenues vs tax incentives that drive a critical mass of investments.
Progressive and transparent fiscal regimes are generally considered to be more stable
and credible and, depending on the fiscal design, they do not compromise on 
efficiency. 
FRGA are based on clarity and transparency which require that:
• Rules are established by law and contracts are published;
• Laws are consistent with the nation’s jurisprudence;
• Laws and contracts minimise discretion;
• Government revenue streams should occur during all production periods but 
also should increase with a larger share of revenues as profitability increases;
• Progressive fiscal systems that arise from FRGAs should be based on:
o Royalty (Early Revenues);
o Regular Corporate Income Tax (CITA);
o Tax on Rent (Hydrocarbon Tax).
Stable and credible fiscal terms must also demonstrate robustness in the face of 
volatilities of cost and price. Robustness means that the fiscal system for gas is not 
subsidised by oil and vice-versa. This can best be achieved through the right pricing 
of gas and lower royalties and resource tax. Additionally, FRGAs must deter transfer 
pricing (cost benchmarking) and review international treaties.
Principles of the Fiscal Framework
1. Pricing should not be fixed by the state – market based pricing will prevail;
2. Fiscal policies must enhance investment, be cost efficient and sustainable in 
the long run;
3. Non-consolidation / non-recovery of gas costs from oil income. The fiscal 
framework intends to remove the distortions in AGFA from the effective crosssubsidy of oil to the gas sector. The gas policy will therefore ensure that gas 
project costs are attributed to gas projects, and gas projects are standalone;
4. At the same time, the government intends to have separate fiscal treatment for 
exploration, production and midstream gas activities, to relax royalty and tax 
rates for gas, and incentivise entry into the midstream. These are all designed to stimulate investment and ensure that gas projects can be economically 
viable from a fiscal viewpoint;
5. Upstream incentives to invest in gas-for-development (for example, to promote 
increased E&P activity in the onshore frontier areas by providing globally 
competitive incentives) can include the introduction of more favourable 
upstream terms for gas activities:
a. Reduced royalty rates for gas;
b. Under production sharing contracts (PSCs), introduction of more 
favourable production allowances and hydrocarbon tax in the event of 
gas production;
6. Fiscal policy incentives to attract investment into the midstream.

#5. INDUSTRY STRUCTURE
5.1. Background
Solutions to the development of the petroleum sector in Nigeria (as in any market 
around the world) are in three areas:
• Areas where Government can have a direct effect: Government sets the 
policy, law and the regulatory framework, which directly sets the tone for the 
whole market.
• Areas where Government sets the environment: Government can support 
the development of the market, such as pushing the implementation of the Gas 
policy, and by attracting investors to the country. Government implements 
policy frameworks and regulations effectively and provides market support 
(such as financial incentives or tax support).
• Areas where the market acts directly and there is no role for Government: 
Government can set the scene but ultimately the private sector builds the gas 
market.
5.2. Strategic Objectives
The gas policy envisions an industry founded on partnership between the 
public and private sectors, albeit with a clear separation of roles between 
the government and the private sector.
The respective roles of the parties envisaged by the Gas Policy are:
• Government: 
o Policy setting;
o Legislation;
o Regulation;
o Putting in place mechanisms to encourage the development of 
markets;
o Encouraging payment discipline;
o Encouraging the development of fair and competitive gas markets.
• Corporate sector:
o Creating markets;
o Conducting safe, healthy and environmentally friendly operations;
o Serving their shareholders, as well as consumers, government and 
other stakeholders.
This policy recognises that state-owned corporations and private sector companies 
will have the same responsibilities and opportunities in accordance with extant laws. 
It is the policy, for example, that nobody will be forced to sell gas to a party only 
because that party is Government – owned.Roles of GovernmentOwned Corporations
They are a number of government-owned corporations operating in the Nigerian gas 
sector. These include:
i. Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC)
Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) is the agency of the government 
responsible for representing the commercial interests of the government in petroleum 
exploitation and distribution. It is involved in natural gas production on a joint-venture
(JV) basis with international oil companies (IOCs) and with international and national 
independent operators, which act either as the operator of joint venture concessions 
held under Oil Mining Leases or as contractors under Production Sharing Contracts 
(PSCs).
NNPC subsidiaries relevant to the gas sector are:
ii. Nigerian Petroleum Development Company Limited (NPDC)
NPDC is a fully-owned subsidiary of NNPC. NPDC is engaged in oil and gas 
exploration and production activities in the hydrocarbon-rich regions of coastal Nigeria
(the Niger Delta), both onshore and offshore, and more recently around Equatorial 
Guinea. NPDC operates JVs with international and national operators.
iii. Nigerian Petroleum Investment Management Services Limited (NAPIMS)
NNPC’s representatives in the Operating Committees of the various joint ventures are 
seconded from Nigerian Petroleum Investment Management Services Limited 
(NAPIMS) which is a subsidiary company of NNPC, established to manage NNPC’s 
interests in the various oil concessions. In addition, all project proposals, joint venture 
budgets and key operating decisions in gas projects are subject to NAPIMS approval.
iv. Nigerian Gas Processing & Transportation Company (NGPTC)
Will own and operate the government - owned gas transmission network a d process 
plants.
v. Nigerian Gas Marketing Company (NGMC) 
Will own all the supply contracts and will operate NNPC’s gas supply business.
The NGPTC and NGMC were created after the unbundling of the Nigerian Gas 
Company (NGC), the former NNPC gas transportation and marketing subsidiary which 
had operated both as a transporter, wholesale supplier of gas and franchisor of gas 
distribution franchises. That previous role restricted the development of a competitive 
and growing gas market; hence unbundling is a structural solution that should allow
the national oil company to operate more efficiently in the gas business whilst allowing
for a more efficient development of the market.The policy is that every entity in the gas industry will be required to 
unbundle various activities in the gas sector, in particular gas 
transportation will be separated from wholesale gas supply.
Strategic Partnerships
The government intends to seek strategic partnerships to support 
operations in parts of the Nigerian gas industry, in particular for 
NGPTC. 
Strategic partners with demonstrable ability to support NGPTC with modern 
management and technology, and so increase the effectiveness and value of the 
company, may be offered a sizeable shareholding in the company. 
Export Gas Ownership and Tolling
It is the intention of the gas policy for Nigeria to become more 
involved in marketing gas in international markets. 
This will initially be through sales to wholesalers at the regasification terminal but over 
time, Nigeria will become involved in sales to downstream customers within 
international countries. This will apply particularly in Europe where there is more 
downstream gas market liberalisation. This envisages that the national oil and gas 
company will retain ownership of its equity gas which is destined for export markets, 
until sale to suppliers or the final consumer in international markets. 
The gas policy envisages a cost of service tolling structure for 
future participation of the national oil company in new LNG 
projects.
Wholesale Domestic Market
The gas policy intends a change in market structure conduct and 
performance with a move towards wholesale markets. 
Producers, their gas marketing affiliates, or independent wholesale traders will be 
licensed as gas suppliers to make gas available for wholesale delivery within Nigeria. 
Wholesale consumers (industries and power plants) will buy from suppliers. Separation of Transport and Trading
For wholesale markets to work, the common practice now across most of the world is 
for a clear separation of the activities of gas transportation and gas trading. 
Transporters will not be allowed to trade and traders will not be allowed to transport 
gas except through separately incorporated and managed entities. This is why NGC 
or any other entity will be separated into legally separate transport and trading 
companies.
Domestic Gas Supply Obligations
The Government understands why operators would rather deliver gas to international 
markets than to the domestic gas market:
• Higher prices can be commanded in export markets;
• Payment discipline is virtually guaranteed in export markets;
• The infrastructure exists so it is much easier to put gas into market.
Nevertheless, it is the desire of the Nigerian government and people to build a 
domestic gas market in order to ensure national economic development. 
The policy imperative is for gas development for priority supply to
power generation. The thrust of the gas policy is also that gas will 
be supplied to enable gas based industrialisation.
Domestic gas supply obligations have become a standard regulatory tool amongst 
producer nations around the world to ensure gas is available for domestic markets. 
The government considers it reasonable for there to be a domestic 
gas supply obligation imposed on producers which is sufficient to 
kick-start domestic market development but not so high that 
producers see it as onerous.
The government expects that producers will see the obligations as part of their 
contributions to national development and doing business in Nigeria.
All producers must make gas available for the domestic market up to the limit of the 
obligation.
As a matter of policy, the issuance and renewal of upstream 
licences will be subject to strict compliance by the applicant with 
its domestic gas supply obligation.
Review the Gas Aggregation Policy
The development of a competitive market for gas supply inevitably means that Nigeria 
will ultimately move away from the concept of gas aggregation. The Gas Aggregation 
Company of Nigeria (GACN) was initially licenced as a vehicle for the industry to 
operate the aggregation process for a transitional period of five years only. In the years 
since this model was established, GACN has been largely unsuccessful in meeting its 
objective of growing the domestic gas industry to maturityThe government will review the licence of GACN and will determine 
what role it can usefully play in the new industry structure as laid 
out in this gas policy.
5.3. Gas Market Structure
Philosophy of the Regulatory Structure
There will be a strong independent regulator that will be responsible for the technical 
and economic regulation of the gas sector. The role includes minimising and, where 
possible, eliminating market distortions, and implementing licensing, monitoring, 
investigations, and dispute mediation powers. 
The licensing regime will cover every activity including, but not limited to, licences for 
exploration, production, constructing and operating gas processing plants, liquefaction 
plants, constructing and operating gas storage facilities, transportation pipelines, 
distribution networks, undertaking the supply of natural gas including gas trading, and 
acting as a “supplier of last resort”.
All regulatory and pseudo-regulatory activities will be removed from corporate entities 
and taken over by the regulator. This includes, for example, distribution licensing and 
franchising arrangements by any party. In addition, a network code will be introduced 
to provide conditions for non-discriminatory access for third parties to all infrastructure 
along the supply chain.
Supply segment: The wholesale gas supply segment will be open under a Supply 
Licence to any gas producer or gas merchant who meets the regulator’s qualifying 
criteria as an Eligible Supplier. An Eligible Supplier shall be entitled to purchase gas 
from a producer or any other Eligible Supplier for on-sale to any off-taker.
The policy seeks to promote more efficient utilisation of capital by encouraging
producers to focus their investments and activities more on exploration, development 
and production of gas, whilst specialised midstream investors can process and 
transport gas. The regulator’s role is to calibrate the supply segment such that it 
becomes open to as many players as possible in order to foster competition for the 
market amongst licensed entities. This competitive pressure ultimately compels 
innovation and efficiency in gas development because the profit motive provides an 
incentive to control costs. Gas prices should come down as a long-run effect of 
increased supply and competition. 
Midstream segment: The policy objective for the midstream is to attract as much 
investment as possible into gas processing, transportation and storage in order to 
bridge Nigeria’s gas abundance with growing demand.


The gas policy envisages a cost of service tolling structure in the midstream such that 
producers can focus on exploration and production activities while midstream 
investors specialise in processing, transportation and storage of gas, or in marketing 
of gas, for upstream producers.
Given the network-bound and monopoly features of the midstream, the regulatory 
objective should be utility regulation. The relevant regulatory tools in this regard are:
• Competition regulation;
• Open access rules;
• A Gas Network Code;
• Tariff regulation on a cost of service rate of return basis.Downstream segment: The downstream segment will be open for wholesale gas 
supply by Eligible Suppliers to any Eligible Offtaker who may commercially bypass 
distribution licensees consistent with the open access rules.

#6. DEVELOPING GAS RESOURCES
6.1. Diversification of Supply Sources
Nigeria needs to diversify its gas supply sources from a national 
and energy security perspective. In order to improve security of 
gas supply, the gas policy intends to encourage an environment 
that ensures deliberate gas exploration and production in other 
regions of Nigeria.
The policy shall promote exploration activities for additional gas resources in other 
geologically prospective terrains, especially the offshore and inland basins, including 
the review of the commercial terms upon which titles in these basis are held.
Significant gas reserves have been discovered in some of the inland basis. These 
reserves have a potential to contribute significantly to the development of distributed 
power generation assets in Nigeria, and thereby enhance the diversity of gas supply 
to the power and industrial sectors.
Niger Delta Gas Resources
Gas developments to date have been undertaken largely, almost exclusively, in the 
Niger Delta. Most of the gas discoveries were by accident, with a company typically 
exploring for oil and discovering gas. Most of the gas production in the Niger Delta is 
produced in association with oil production. There are also some dry gas fields, whose 
output is mostly dedicated to LNG exports.


There are security of supply risks with the current situation, emanating from the Niger 
Delta militancy, and consequent disruptive effects on gas production, the environment
and wider economy.The government realises that steps must be taken to reduce the disruptions to 
production from the Niger Delta insecurity and is taking measures to restore long term 
stability to the region. In the meantime, operators are expected to ensure that they 
take sufficient measures to protect their assets and make them secure. 
Ultimately, ensuring a reduction in militancy and ensuring the security of facilities will 
be a collaborative effort among government, industry and Niger Delta communities.
Benue Trough and Sedimentary Basins of Nigeria
As well as the offshore and Niger Delta, many other sedimentary basins have been 
identified (but not yet developed) in Nigeria, including the Benue Trough, the Anambra 
Basin, Kerri Basin, Yola Basin, Gongola Basin, Bida Basin, Lullemeden Basin (with 
Niger) and the Chad Basin (with Chad). A key sedimentary basin is the Anambra 
Basin, which has been barely explored but is considered to be most likely extensive 
and rich in dry natural gas.

6.2. Identifying Low Cost Gas Resources
Except for gas which is held by Government through NNPC in joint venture with third 
parties or on a sole risk basis by independents, the Nigerian government has 
ownership rights over virtually all the gas resources in the country. Within this overall 
portfolio are several low cost wet gas resources, where the inherent value of the 
natural gas liquids could be leveraged to yield an affordable gas price for the domestic 
market.To achieve gas based industrialisation low-cost gas resources will 
be identified and dedicated to the Nigerian domestic market.
Portfolio management methodologies will be utilised to prioritise the development of 
low cost gas to be identified, with the subsequent intention to have a proportion of 
that dedicated to domestic markets.

6.3. Clarifying Gas Terms for PSCs
Nigerian PSCs are structured more for crude oil exploration and development. The
PSCs have incorporated gas utilisation clauses but they do not contain commercial 
terms between NNPC and the contractor for development of gas discovered within the 
concession. The PSC merely provides that in the event of the discovery of a viable 
quantity of natural gas, the contractor shall investigate the discovery and submit 
proposals to NNPC for the development of the gas, and a separate agreement is then 
negotiated between NNPC and the contractor for a gas development.
The absence of clarity regarding terms for gas commercialisation means that 
significant discovered gas resources remain undeveloped in Nigeria’s PSC blocks, 
especially in offshore basins. Urgent attention to this issue is now required.
The government will develop a model Gas Development Agreement containing 
its terms for the development of gas resources in PSC concessions.
The policy is that PSC terms will be defined to ensure development 
of gas resources, for the benefit of the nation.
The government will present the industry with a model Gas 
Development Agreement containing its terms for the 
development of gas resources in PSC concessions.This agreement will address the contractual and fiscal issues relevant to upstream 
gas production in PSCs while providing some flexibility for adjustment as may be 
required. 
6.4. Gas Flaring
Background
Gas flaring has a direct ongoing environmental cost and addressing it is a COP22 
commitment. In addressing this, the MPR will work in collaboration with the Federal 
Ministry of Environment.
The flaring of natural gas that is produced in association with oil is one of the most 
egregious environmental and energy waste practices in the Nigerian petroleum 
industry. While gas flaring levels have declined in recent years, it is still a prevailing 
practice in the petroleum industry. Billions of cubic meters of natural gas are flared 
annually at oil production locations resulting in atmospheric pollution severely affecting 
host communities. Gas flaring affects the environment and human health, produces 
economic loss, deprives the government of tax revenues and trade opportunities, and 
deprives consumers of a clean and cheaper energy source. Effective action on gas 
flaring would address a long held grievance for the Niger Delta region.
History of Nigerian Gas Flaring Legislation
Although Nigeria still flares a significant portion of its gross natural gas production 
(19% of AG, 331sbcf in 2015), the amount of gas flared has significantly reduced in 
recent years. Its ranking has dropped from the 2nd to the 5th largest natural gas flaring 
country in the world (according to Cedigaz and OPEC) or 7th (according to GGFR 
2016).

To ensure that flared gas is utilised in markets, the government will 
take measures to ensure that flare capture and utilisation projects 
are developed and will work collaboratively with industry, development partners, providers of flarecapture technologies and 
third-party investors to this end, without prejudice to the 
enforcement of applicable sanctions.


Gas Re-Injection
Nigeria is an example of an oil exporting country where the associated gas was mostly 
flared or re-injected in oil fields during the last decades, in the absence of commercial 
uses for gas. Historically, there have been no restrictions in Nigeria on any company 
to re-inject any extra gas. However, the new position is that the government prefers 
the utilisation of flared gas into markets, utilised by different downstream sectors, 
rather than flared or re-injected with no valid technical reason. 
It is the policy that gas utilisation will be a priority consideration 
over other considerations for handling of associated gas. In the 
absence of compelling technical reasons or a viable outlet for the 
gas, the Government intends to restrict undue re-injection of 
associated gas.


Gas FlareOut through Gas Utilisation Projects
Under the gas policy, the government intends to maximise 
utilisation of associated gas to be treated for supply to power 
generation or industry. 
Routine gas flaring reduction projects are not to be seen as isolated elements of oil 
and gas sector operations. Flared gas utilisation is part of the wider gas policy to 
develop Nigeria’s gas resources and release much more of the value from national 
gas resources. 
The best prospects for reducing remaining gas flare sites are through projects 
developed by investors and companies with experience in innovation in modest size 
projects in challenging environments and with strong local engagements plans. Some 
examples could be:
• Plans for metered electricity to host communities immediately adjacent to flare 
sites;
• Projects which could be of significance to local regional electricity distribution 
companies as embedded power projects;
Critical levers for rural economic development in the Niger Delta, which can provide 
islands of stable metered electricity or gas products, such as LPG. These can give the 
cluster area around a site a significant economic advantage for hosting businesses.
New Flare Capture Technologies
Gas flaring reduction technology has the potential to be one of the great energy and 
environmental success stories. Unlike long-term greenhouse gas solutions such as 
carbon sequestration or wider deployment of nuclear power, gas flaring can be dealt 
with today through a variety of existing high-performance technologies. 
New technology solutions for the capture and utilisation of associated gas are 
encouraged, which could include, for example:
1. Power generation projects designed to utilise flared gas;
2. Replacing diesel fuel with gas for power generation with small gas engines;
3. Combining new processing systems with efficient fuel flexible gas turbines;
4. Small-scale GTL or mini-LNG plants;
5. Gas infrastructure (processing and transportation) solutions;
6. Identifying and designing the full value chain for gas supply, including gas 
gathering pipelines, to connect different small- and large-size flaring fields. 
The commercialisation of flared gas for supply into the domestic market is a high 
priority strategy for the Government in achieving the national mandate for flare-out by 
2020.
To ensure that flared gas is put to use in markets, the government 
will take measures to ensure that flare capture and utilisation projects are developed, and will work collaboratively with industry, 
development partners, providers of flare-capture technologies and 
third party investors to this end.
Flare-Out Targets
The Government plans to open an industry consultation 
mechanism, as an important measure in ensuring flaring targets are 
feasible and regulations are realistic.
Gas Flaring Penalties
The current gas flare penalty of N10/Mscf (equivalent US $0.03) of associated gas 
flared is too low, having been eroded in value over time, and is not acting as intended, 
as a disincentive. Consequently, the low penalty has made gas flaring a much cheaper 
option for operators compared to the alternatives of marketing or re-injection. 
The intention of Government is to increase the gas flaring penalty 
to an appropriate level sufficient to de-incentivise the practice of 
gas flaring whilst introducing other measures to encourage efficient 
gas utilisation.
It will also be an offence for false data regarding gas flaring to be provided, with a 
steep tier of fines for providing false data to any FG agency relating to flares.
New Field Developments
The government intends to develop regulations which will prohibit any greenfield oil 
and/or gas project from moving forward until there is a proper integrated plan for the 
development of the hydrocarbons thereby ensuring that no gas flaring occurs during 
production of hydrocarbons, except in very special circumstances such as 
emergencies for operational reasons. 
Existing Fields
For existing AG fields, brown field sites, the government will also consider other 
options to ensure significant gas flare reductions.
1. Operators of existing AG fields need to produce integrated gas flare reduction 
plans; they will then be expected to implement those plans;
2. The government will consider a new sliding scale penalty to be introduced for 
existing brown field sites, especially for JV and Service contracts which
contribute 88% of the total associated gas flared in the country;
3. Existing AG fields need to start planning and investing in the utilisation of the 
associated gas to be supplied into the market, and to come up with economic 
plans for their development;
4. The government will consider regulations to allow for open access to gas 
gathering pipelines, to ensure that flared gas has access to gas gathering 
systems and gas processing facilities;5. If the proposed regulations do not prove enough, the government will consider 
further measures to ensure effective and significant gas flare reductions.
Uneconomic Fields
For those few fields where it is clearly shown to be uneconomic to develop and 
implement a gas flare reduction plan, the government will consider other options. 
These could include orders to shut in production at those fields.
6.5. Gas Field Development Plans
Government considers that the best time to intervene to ensure an optimised gas 
development plan is at the approval stage. AG fields are unlikely to be allowed to be 
developed unless there is a gas field development plan (FDP) in place. FDPs without 
acceptable plans for AG development should be deferred in favour of other projects. 
All upstream development proposals (oil or gas) should contain:
1. A study of the economic efficiency of the FDP;
2. A practical gas utilisation plan for field life;
3. An assessment of the reliability and robustness of the marketing plan;
4. A study of the use of shared infrastructure especially for gathering and 
processing;
5. Clear HSE plans with targets.
Clear performance criteria should be set for the retention, withdrawal and 
relinquishment of exploration licences.
6.6. Gas Resource Management Plan
Gas development must be undertaken in accordance with Nigeria’s national socioeconomic development priorities. Accordingly, the government through the MPR and 
with support from NNPC and industry will produce a Gas Resource Management Plan. 
This will:
• identify gas resources in different geological areas;
• identify current and potential gas markets;
• identify infrastructure needs;
• analyse how best to access low cost gas for delivery to domestic gas 
markets.
The Gas Resource Management Plan will classify gas resources according to the 
following categories:
• Low-cost assets dedicated to domestic gas supply (National Preferential 
Assets);
• Assets dedicated to export;
• National Strategic Gas Reserve (reserved for future development);
• Optional assets (sole risk assets).


#7. INFRASTRUCTURE
7.1. National Gas Infrastructure Blueprint
The key gas infrastructure needs will be identified and appropriate recommendations 
for upgrading the design of the existing National Gas Infrastructure Blueprint will be 
made to Government. 
The gas infrastructure required will be identified under these categories:
1. Existing gas infrastructure: Review of the existing gas transmission 
infrastructure in place.
2. Gas Master Plan Infrastructure Blueprint:
o What was planned in the Gas Master Plan?
o What has been achieved?
o What parts are still valid now?
3. New gas transportation links.
4. Upgrading NGPTC network: Upgrades needed to the existing NGPTC
network.
5. Alternative gas transportation options:
o CNG by road, rail or barge;
o LNG by road, rail or barge;
o other virtual pipeline options that may be identified.
6. Key anchor customer infrastructure: The investments required at key 
anchor customer sites, for example at Ajaokuta Steel.
7. Distribution infrastructure: Local distribution companies licensed by the 
petroleum regulatory authority.
8. Security of gas supply investment: The additional infrastructure needed to 
improve the robustness of the Gas Infrastructure Blueprint and ensure gas 
supply security.
9. Resource clusters: Identification of gas resources and clusters.
10.Identification of critical gas infrastructure: Critical gas infrastructure 
includes the following:
• Aba-Owerri-Nnewi-Onitsha Pipeline Project;
• Calabar-Ajaokuta Pipeline (CAP) Project;
• Ajaokuta-Kaduna-Kano (AKK) Pipeline Project;
• ELP-Ibadan-Jebba Pipeline Project;
• Obiafu-Obrikom-Oben (OB3) Pipeline Project;
• Expansion of ELP Phase 2 Project;
• Oso Platform to QIT Pipeline Project;
• Erha / Bosi Pipeline Project;
• TransSahara Gas Pipeline Project.

Entry into the midstream will be liberalised and incentivised to allow 
private sector investors to develop infrastructure to process, 
transport and store natural gas.
The Infrastructure Blueprint of the Gas Master will be upgraded and amended within 
the context of the Gas Resource Management Plan. The amended and updated 
Infrastructure Blueprint will identify resources and resource clusters, identify critical 
infrastructure and prioritise developments. Working in collaboration with the industry 
and NGPTC, the MPR will take the lead in ensuring the Infrastructure Blueprint is 
updated. 
The final version of the Infrastructure Blueprint will be made public as an aid to 
development. This means that if a developer wishes to pursue a project which is not 
in the blueprint, they will be permitted to do so, provided that they obtain the relevant licence which will be granted based upon an evaluation of the economic benefits of 
the project.


7.2. Need to Improve the Whole Supply Chain
The Nigerian government is aware that there are currently challenges across the 
whole supply chain but the government is determined to improve the following:
• Physical infrastructure, including gas infrastructure, roads, 
telecommunications and others;
• Business environment;
• Cost optimisation in gas projects;
• Increasing transparency and minimising inefficiencies.

#8. BUILDING GAS MARKETS
8.1. Introduction
A key aspect of the vision of the gas policy is for gas-based industrialisation of 
Nigeria.
The intention of the Government is that natural gas exports will 
continue, albeit consistent with Nigeria’s aspirations for domestic 
gas market development.
Renewal of licences and leases will be subject to a commitment by 
the licensee or lessee to the development of the discovered gas 
resources within the licence or lease area for domestic or export 
projects, as applicable, and within a specific timeframe.
Strategic Objective
The vision of the gas policy is for gas-based industrialisation of Nigeria
Means of growing the domestic gas market which have been identified under this gas 
policy include:
o Identifying and developing clusters and industrial parks; 
o Market growth from anchor customers;
o Gas based industrialisation; 
o Gas for Development Programme; 
o Alternative markets and uses for Gas:
- CNG;
- NGVs;
- LPG;
- LNG vehicles;
- LNG for agriculture and agro-allied industries
o Financing methods;
o Improvements to the supply chain.
8.2. Export Projects
The Policy focus is to gain more of the value from downstream export markets.
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG)
Through the Nigerian LNG Company, Nigeria is one of the world’s leading LNG 
exporter nations. Although Nigerian LNG is sold to Far Eastern markets in the Pacific 
basin (and were indeed the main set of markets for Nigerian LNG in 2015), Atlantic 
basin markets historically have been and in the future will be the main markets for 
Nigerian LNG. This is because of their geographic proximity to Nigeria and the 
consequent lower transportation costs of LNG. 
North America is no longer a market for gas exports within the Atlantic Basin, leaving 
Europe and South America as the main destinations for Nigerian LNGBoth of these markets however have challenges for a country like Nigeria that wishes to maximise 
LNG exports. European economic growth remains below expectations and a 
European policy drive towards energy savings measures throughout the EU leads to 
restrained demand for LNG in Europe. Despite lowered expectations, Europe remains 
a large gas market and will continue to need considerable amounts of imported LNG 
and pipeline gas.
South America is seeing fast growing markets for LNG but a large proportion of 
supplies for those markets is currently sourced from Trinidad & Tobago. While Nigeria 
certainly could sell to South American markets the gas policy realises that some 
ground has to be made up to become established there.
The gas policy foresees Nigerian gas exports being largely directed to European 
markets and South America, although there will be some opportunities for exports to 
Far Eastern markets.
1. Retaining Ownership of LNG
Nigeria will continue to seek opportunities in the global LNG market either through the 
expansion of the capacity of the Nigerian LNG company or through the development 
of the OK and Brass LNG or other LNG projects as may be considered appropriate 
and commercially feasible. The intention, however, is for Nigeria to retain ownership 
of its natural gas up to the point of delivery into markets. The government therefore 
intends to move to a tolling arrangement with respect to exports of Government’s 
equity LNG from new projects, whereby the LNG liquefaction facility is paid a fee for 
liquefying the government share of gas produced from its assets, and LNG shippers 
are paid a transportation fee for transporting it. Ownership and title to the gas therefore 
remains with the government entity up to the point where it is regasified at the export 
market regasification terminal and sold to shippers.
2. Improve LNG Marketing
As Nigerian government entities become more experienced in gas marketing, it is 
expected that the government entity will be able to retain ownership further 
downstream, gaining access to transport networks and selling directly to large 
consumers.
As an example of the concept, Russian Gazprom has an equity shareholding in the 
UK-Belgium Gas Interconnector. Gazprom subsequently applied for a UK shipper’s 
licence and now operates a gas marketing operation in the UK, selling Russian gas 
directly to consumers in the UK. 
Regional and International Pipeline Projects
West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP)
The WAGP is the gas export pipeline originating at Lagos as an extension from the 
ELPS and delivering to consumers in Benin, Togo and Ghana. 
There have been numerous problems with this export pipeline project, including:
• Vastly over-costed infrastructure;
• Shortage of supplies from the 
Nigerian side;
• Payment defaults by some 
WAGP customers;
• Pipeline vandalism in Nigeria.

The government is aware of the problems with the WAGP 
project and shall take appropriate corrective steps to ensure 
sustained gas supply into the West African region.
For the Country to maintain its position as a leader in the transportation of Gas in the 
West African sub region, government shall facilitate the business and regulatory 
environment for the development of the backbone gas infrastructure and 
extensions for the Trans-Saharan Gas Pipeline. 

Trans-Saharan Gas Pipeline
Initial feasibility studies have been carried out 
and MOUs have been signed amongst the 
governments of Nigeria, Niger and Algeria. 
As a first step towards implementation of the 
project, the backbone infrastructure of a gas 
corridor from the south east to the northern 
most parts of Nigeria will be built, which will 
allow for subsequent extensions to major 
population load centres throughout Nigeria.


8.3. Growing Domestic Gas Markets
Encouraging Gas Projects – Project Based Approach
Supply to the domestic gas market has not grown as expected or forecast. New 
measures are therefore required to support the growth of domestic gas markets.
Gas development was previously based around export gas projects with some local 
market development as a secondary objective, which did not deliver. Gas 
developments will henceforth be on a project-by-project basis but backed by a clear 
DSO, which means delivery of domestic gas projects will be the primary not secondary 
objective of project developers. Within this regulatory push (of a DSO), gas 
development will be essentially market-led rather than centrally planned.
Rather than trying to continue with a centrally planned national 
market development, the gas policy proposes a project-based and
market opportunity-led approach as a more effective way to grow 
gas markets.
Appropriate frameworks will be developed to support gas-based 
projects, including gas transport pipelines and associated anchor 
customers or demand clusters.
Projects will largely be developed by project developers from the 
private sector. The government will set the environment and 
support investors in gas-based industrial projects with appropriate 
interventions to bring their projects to fruition. 
Gas-Based Industrialisation
The vision of the gas policy is for gas-based industrialisation of Nigeria.
This means that gas-fired power plants will continue to be targeted but the government 
will also promote the development of gas for industrial purposes. 
The long-term vision for Nigeria is a diverse industrial base that
is fired by natural gas.
Market Growth from Anchor Customers
Project-based gas industrialisation will mean that gas market development projects 
will grow around anchor customers. Anchor customers are large consumption centres 
where the demand is large enough and which are profitable enough, to enable the 
infrastructure to be built (including gas gathering and processing; gas transportation 
pipelines; and consumption site facilities).
There are essentially four types of anchor customer that a natural gas project-based 
approach will support:
• Gas fired power generation;
• Large industrial customerssuch as Ajaokuta Steel;• Distribution companies;
• Industrial parks.
Identifying and Developing Clusters
A cluster in the Nigerian energy context, is a geographical part of the country where 
there is a demand centre (large enough and with economically viable consumers), a 
short transportation system and a source of energy supply. Because there currently 
remain some problems with Transmission Company of Nigeria (TCN) in terms of the 
ability to consistently transfer large volumes of stable electricity around the country on 
a national grid, alternative ways of getting energy to consumers is under consideration 
by many parties. Gas and LPG can be parts of the solution.
As part of the gas policy, studies will be undertaken to identify 
where there are clusters which could form anchor loads for a gas 
project. The government will facilitate the development of these gas 
projects to clusters but the private sector is expected to develop 
the projects.
The gas policy also encourages further gas development for other 
projects, including:
• Petrochemical plants;
• Fertiliser plants;
• Village power plants;
• Embedded power plants;
• CNG plants;
• LPG plants;
• CNG:
o Natural Gas Vehicles (NGV);
o CNG transport by barge, rail and/or road;
• LNG for domestic downstream applications, such as:
o LNG vehicles;
o LNG to power;
o LNG to industry;
o LNG to Agriculture
• GTL projects.
Alternative Markets / Uses for Gas
Other markets for and uses of gas are also possible and the intention of the gas 
policy is to support project developers and investors seeking to develop 
alternative gas markets in realising their projects. 
Natural Gas Vehicles (NGV)
Vehicles using CNG may be appropriate for some large Nigerian cities under a single 
regulatory authority, such as Lagos, Port Harcourt, Abuja, Kano and Kaduna for 
example or where there are large vehicle fleets such as large corporate fleets or buses 
and/or taxis in large urban areas. NGVs really take off when there is a determined government push behind the initiative. 
When there is a push which generates a demand, then the markets starts to provide 
NGV filling stations. NGVs started to take off in London (UK) for example when the 
Mayor announced that taxis that were not converted to at least dual fuel would not 
have their licences renewed. NGVs also have a wide use in the West African region 
outside Nigeria, specifically in Ghana.
The government intends to support CNG penetration, to set the 
environment, help to develop fleet markets in some large cities and 
to ensure adequate gas supply but the government does not intend 
to directly invest or become operationally involved. Having set the 
framework, the government wishes to encourage private sector 
investment and operations.
Gas for Rail Electrification
Another important gas market is the provision of gas to power for the provision of 
electricity for rail electrification across Nigeria. This can include electrification of some
of the existing and proposed new railway lines.
CNG Transportation
This does not refer to using CNG as the vehicle fuel, instead it refers to the different 
ways in which compressed natural gas can be transported around the country. This 
can provide an alternative to pipeline gas transport for inland destinations.
CNG by Road: As an alternative to building a gas pipeline, CNG can be transported 
to markets by truck on roads. The advantages are that gas markets can be reached 
that would otherwise be uneconomic to reach (the average cost is lower), thus opening 
up new gas markets. The main disadvantage is that this puts further pressure on substandard Nigerian roads and on the limited number of and poor quality of trucks (high 
marginal cost). The risk of accidents and explosions in populated areas is also higher 
using CNG by road. This could be a viable option for some inland industrial centres, 
such as Nnewi (Anambra) for example.
CNG by Rail: This option has the same benefits as CNG by road. The risks of 
accidents are less though, giving further advantages. As the rail network improves this 
could become a viable option.
CNG by Barge: Another alternative to using pipelines could be the transportation of 
CNG by boat up the river Niger or along the coast.
LNG Trucks
Vehicles carrying liquefied gas are a new technology and may have advantages over 
CNG by road because substantially larger volumes of gas can be transported as LNG 
(LNG carries 600 times the energy content of gaseous gas). Under the gas policy, the Nigerian government encourages the private 
sector to take forward proposals and invest in this alternative 
transportation method.
8.4. Policy for Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG)
LPG Production and Consumption
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) is a mixture of propane and butane (generally 
approximately 50% each) and is produced as a by-product from refining crude oil or 
processing natural gas. 
LPG presents a window of opportunity to bring about improved quality of life for the 
populace. A vibrant LPG market in Nigeria will no doubt induce a positive ripple effect 
that will translate into more jobs for the millions of unemployed Nigerians and business 
opportunities. For instance, local manufacturing of gas cylinders, autogas and power 
generation services would be encouraged as a result of increased demand. Fiscal and 
environmental benefits in the form of increased tax revenues and carbon credits for 
government are very crucial even as Nigeria joins the rest of the global community to 
benefit from the use of clean fuels like LPG.
Production of LPG in Nigeria is currently approximately 4mt per annum of LPG, largely 
for exports. This is mostly produced from natural gas processing and some smaller 
production from the NNPC refineries at Warri and Port Harcourt and Kaduna. 
Presently, the major source of LPG in the country is from the gas processing facilities, 
especially the Nigerian LNG (NLNG) company.
Nigeria Petroleum Marketing Company (NPMC, formerly Petroleum Products
Marketing Company or PPMC), the division of NNPC which acts as its marketing arm 
within Nigeria, is the main operator in the LPG market and is of a sufficient size and 
power to affect the performance of the whole LPG industry in Nigeria. It owns and 
operates nine LPG storage depots around the country. NPMC buys its LPG from the 
NNPC refineries and provides storage for importers. NPMC sells LPG to export 
markets, to marketers in bulk and is also allowed to retail directly to end users. 
If Nigerian gas production increases to 100 mtoe a year, LPG production could also 
increase to approximately 10 million tonnes a year. As well as consequences for the 
domestic natural gas market in Nigeria, there are also consequences and 
opportunities for domestic LPG markets in Nigeria and the region. LPG is therefore an 
important gas product in its own right and an important part of a gas policy for Nigeria 
given its potential to increase natural gas usage.
However, as with natural gas, this resource is largely unused. Most of the production 
is exported and LPG consumption within Nigeria is recorded at a much lower figure, 
at around 400,000 tonnes a year as of 2015. The potential demand is much higher, at 
probably 1-3 mpta. Nigerian LPG consumption per head is very low relative to other 
or neighbouring African countries. 
As with natural gas, insufficient LPG product is being made available for the domestic 
market. NLNG is offering 250,000 mtpa to the domestic market but it is not being taken up, largely because of infrastructure restrictions, namely in passing through the import 
jetties.
In many emerging markets around the world, LPG has an unofficial, undeclared 
market that operates outside the official attention of the national regulatory authorities. 
It is suspected that Nigeria has a similar situation, with undeclared imports coming 
over the border from Niger or Benin, as well as some undeclared domestic production 
and diversion of supplies.
Development of LPG market in Nigeria is urgently required in the areas of domestic, 
power generation, autogas and industrial purposes. 
LPG Infrastructure
The domestic Nigerian LPG market suffers from an inefficient distribution chain and 
prices that are higher than they would be in an efficient functioning market.
Jetties: The only functioning import jetties currently are at Apapa, Lagos. LPG 
supplies are restricted to the jetties at Apapa which are all operated by Hyson, a JV 
of NNPC and VITOL, which brings in VITOL LPG as well as third party LPG. Two new 
terminals are under construction at Calabar and Port Harcourt. 
Depot Storage: There is limited depot storage, 14,500 tonnes of private and 4,000 
tonnes PPMC storage, at Apapa (Lagos) and Calabar. Some other limited depot 
storage facilities around the country owned by PPMC are non-functioning.
Road Transport: There is limited road transport to take LPG from Apapa and Calabar 
to distribution terminals around the country. There are around 900 functioning
(although old) trucks nationwide with a total transport capacity of around 2,000 tonnes.
Distribution Terminals: There are 200 distribution terminals (bottling plants) around 
the country with around 13,000 tonnes capacity in total.
Cylinders: The most critical infrastructure problem, alongside that of the import jetties, 
is the state of cylinders in the country. There are around 1.8m cylinders, of which some 
10% could be cleared as safe. Unsafe cylinders, owned by the consumers and which 
are cross-filled, are major safety hazards.
The Scope of the LPG Policy
The scope of the policy for LPG in Nigeria covers its uses in the following areas:
1. Domestic: Broader penetration of LPG into homes – low income, rural etc.;
2. Power Generation: Encouraging the wider use of LPG in off grid and on grid 
power generation;
3. Autogas: Encouraging the wider use of LPG of autogas in Nigeria;
4. Industrial: Expansion of LPG use in industrial applications to include:a. Agriculture: Dairy production; poultry farming; CO2 generation for 
greenhouses etc.;
b. Industry – Steam and direct heat applications, glass production, clean 
food applications;
c. Commercial – hotels, laundries etc. 
Domestic Applications
Cooking energy has evolved from the use of fire wood and other biomass sources, to 
even more inefficient high polluting and health endangering fuels, such as dirty 
hydrocarbon related energy sources as traditional fuels for domestic cooking/heating 
activities. 
Approximately 30 million households and more than 100 million Nigerians depend on 
wood as a source of energy for cooking but this has come with collateral damage to 
human health, environment and economy of the country. According to WHO, smoke 
from open fire is Nigeria’s third biggest killer with over 95,000 deaths annually behind 
Malaria and HIV/AIDS. Moreover, traditional cooking methods are expensive, burning 
up to 90% more wood than is necessary and costing poor families money that could 
be put to better use on education, health and nutrition. The use of firewood also 
contributes to massive deforestation especially in northern Nigeria while compounding 
the challenges of climate change. Similarly, the use of kerosene as a cooking energy 
source also shares most of the challenges of firewood. LPG brings manifold benefits 
to human health, environment as well as economy of Nigeria. As a domestic cooking 
fuel LPG therefore presents valuable opportunities to simultaneously combat climate 
change, reverse deforestation and improve community health and rural economy and 
livelihood.
LPG has relatively low emissions when compared to other cooking fuels such as 
firewood and kerosene. According to the World Liquefied Petroleum Gas Association 
(WLPGA), LPG delivers far higher calorific value/heat content per unit compared to 
kerosene or firewood. 
In Nigeria, NLPGA research in 2015 shows that the end user pays an average amount 
of N130 for a litre of kerosene. The average cost of 1kg of LPG is N240, which means 
0.37kg of LPG equates to N89. It goes to show that even against subsidised kerosene 
a consumer of kerosene will spend N130 per litre for fuel compared with N89 the same 
consumer will spend on unsubsidized LPG. Furthermore, with increased demand will 
come greater economies of scale, which will further reduce the price of LPG. This has 
been one of the main reasons the market has attracted hundreds of millions of dollars 
of private funding and has grown by over 400% since 2007. It is expected that the 
current price of LPG will further reduce by the time LPG is accepted as the 
predominant domestic fuel across the breadth and length of the country.
Despite the huge reserves of natural gas in the country and all the interventions by 
the FGN, the transformation towards making LPG the primary cooking fuel for 
Nigerians has not been very successful. Many Nigerians do not have access to 
cooking gas (LPG) while for those that already use LPG suffer periodic scarcities of 
LPG. Domestic LPG production accounts for approximately 5% of household energy mix in 
Nigeria.

Industrial Applications
Industrial applications of LPG are extremely susceptible to the cost of switching for 
the industrial consumer. for example, many industries e.g. textile industries in the 
north, which currently run on LPFO/diesel are presently dis-incentivized from 
switching to LPG due to high tariffs and duties on new LPG equipment required for 
the conversion, as well as VAT on LPG as a fuel. yet, once the switch is achieved, 
LPG is actually a cheaper and cleaner fuel for those industries. This highlights just 
one of the issues facing industrial applications of LPG.
In agriculture, several uses of LPG that would stimulate this sector include: 
pasteurization of dairy products; drying of grain and crop; meat, poultry and fish 
product sanitization; chick hatching etc.

Electric Power Applications
The NLPGA estimates that between 1.5 and 2 million tonnes per annum of LPG is 
currently not recovered from flared gas, which is equivalent to over 1,000 MW of power 
generation, or a similar amount of imported liquid fuels (petrol, diesel and/or kerosene) 
displaced if utilized in autogas. 
Nigeria flares annually 1.5 and 2 million tonnes of LPG in its flared gas volumes. This 
is more than enough to:
• Generate about 1,000 MW daily of electricity;
• Displace 5.5 to 7.5 million litres of diesel daily;
• Substitute 200-250 MMscfd of natural gas equivalent in industries such as 
those in Kaduna, Kano etc.; or
• Preserve upwards of 6 – 8 million tonnes of wood annually in our forests.
Despite the potential of LPG as a fuel source, there a few applications of LPG-toPower in Nigeria. In order to drive this sector, the present dearth of equipment such 
as LPG generators, bulk storage tanks, vaporisers etc. will need to be addressed, 
requiring a review of the electric power tariff order to include LPG use and the 
introduction of appropriate fiscal and other incentives to encourage investors to 
choose LPG over other forms of fuel for their power plants.
Improve Access by the Poorest and Reduce Desertification
The government intends to kick-start the market for LPG among the poorest who are 
currently using kerosene and firewood, which are dangerous to health and destructive 
on the environment, contributing to desertification. This will be through pilot schemes 
combined with behaviour change programmes.
The government intends to introduce pilot programmes (at least 
two, one in the north and one in the south) of free handouts of 
small LPG cylinders, cookers and basic supply, with consumers 
expected thereafter to pay for further supplies of LPG fuel. These 
will be combined with behaviour change programmes among 
consumers.
Goals & Objectives of the LPG Policy
The government policy for LPG in Nigeria is to ensure the 
development of a strong and rapidly growing LPG market in 
Nigeria. 
This will include action to ensure that:
1. infrastructure challenges are addressed;
2. market at import jetties are opened up to enable third party access;
3. port clearance is improved;
4. entry cost for consumers is minimised;5. the entry of more players into the market is encouraged;
6. the effectiveness and operations of PPMC is reviewed and PPMC 
restructured;
7. free unregulated pricing are maintained, whilst ensuring ensure price 
publication and price monitoring;
8. the regulatory environment is improved, particularly regarding enforcement of 
safety regulations and discouraging the practice of shortselling;
9. the fiscal environment is improved to provide at least equality of treatment for 
domestic producers;
10.customer education / awareness programmes are launched;
11.access by the poorest is improved.
The overall goal of the policy on LPG is to promote its wider 
use in Domestic, Power generation, Autogas and industrial 
applications towards the attainment of Five Million
(5,000,000) MT utilisation in 5 years. 
It is estimated that about $10.38 bn could be generated for the economy if 50% of the 
current kerosene and firewood users switch over to LPG by 2018, creating along with 
it, over one million skilled jobs in various segments of the LPG supply value chain. In 
the same vein, the utilisation of LPG can also generate far reaching positive outcomes 
for our public health and environment as well as saving cost for government at all tiers.
Development Model for Domestic LPG Market
With a view to successfully ensuring the transformation of the LPG sector, a number 
of strategies, listed below, under four thematic groups namely Availability, 
Affordability, Accessibility and Acceptability, are considered appropriate. These are: 
Availability
As a Medium term strategy, a blend of 40% import content of cylinders and 60% local 
manufacturing content is expected by the 3rd to 4th year of the policy while a target of 
100% manufacturing of local cylinders is expected to be achieved within 5 years. 
To support the goal of improving the development of LPG 
infrastructure such as cylinder manufacturing plants, mini 
- gas plants/skid plants, gas plants and trucks, an LPG 
Availability Gas Intervention Fund of Sixty Billion Naira 
(N60,000,000,000) will be established by the Government.
With respect to autogas penetration:
The government intends to support LPG penetration, to set 
the environment, help to develop fleet markets in some large 
cities and to ensure adequate gas supply but the 
government does not intend to directly invest or become 
operationally involved. 
In order to improve availability, the Government will 
stimulate the demand side to make LPG accessible. This will require fiscal incentives such as reduction in tariffs and 
duties on LPG equipment.
Accessibility
The accessibility of LPG will require leveraging on existing distribution chains of other 
industries (such as bottling and beverage industry). It will also involve ensuring 
adequate permitting from town planners and the regulator to certify (without undue 
delay) identified retail sites.
Acceptability
The key target group for the acceptability of LPG as a fuel of choice are low income 
and medium income earners. The penetration strategy for this group requires 
identifying and engaging with key influencers amongst communities. Examples of key 
influencers are:
• Traditional Rulers / Community Leaders;
• Religious Leaders;
• Women and Market Associations;
• Labour Union Leaders.
The government intends to kick-start the market for LPG among the 
poorest who are currently using kerosene and firewood, which are 
dangerous to health and destructive on the environment, 
contributing to desertification.
Affordability
The major reason for the low consumption of LPG in Nigeria is affordability.
Firstly, there are a number of financial disincentives in the current LPG system. For 
example, VAT is levied on domestic production of LPG and LPG cylinders but not on 
imported cylinders (there were once two domestic cylinder manufacturers but these 
have both since folded up due to the financial challenges). No other petroleum product 
in Nigeria is subject to VAT. In addition, LPG is the only fuel that is not only fully 
deregulated but is also taxed (VAT is applied to domestic LPG but not to imported 
LPG, putting domestic gas at a disadvantage to LPG imports).
The government intends to ensure that all petroleum products 
are treated in a fiscally equivalent manner, such that one 
product is not financially disincentivised compared with 
another.
Secondly, the initial cost of acquiring an LPG cooking pack (cylinders, stoves, 
regulators etc.) as compared to other fuels is higher. Not only are the LPG cylinders 
specialised, but they are also subjected to import taxes even though domestic 
production capacity is presently limited. This has contributed to the shortage of LPG 
cylinders with the estimated number of cylinders in circulation within the country today 
at approximately 1.5 million units as compared to a minimum a requirement of 100 million LPG cylinders in relation to the population. This is a barrier to the growth of the 
LPG market. 
Due to a shortage of local cylinder manufacturing capacity, the 
policy will promote the phased injection of 20 million cylinders over 
a period of 5 years (for comparison the Indonesian Programme 
comprised the injection of 60 million units)2.
LPG Regulation
There are two main regulatory bodies responsible for the LPG sector, the Standards 
Organisation of Nigeria (SON) and the Department of Petroleum Resources (DPR). 
SON sets product standards while the DPR is the inspections and compliance 
regulatory authority. Lack of compliance with the existing regulations which already 
exist is the major problem. 
The government will ensure that the single petroleum regulatory 
authority will be strengthened so that LPG regulations and other 
regulations are enforced and complied with.
Governance Structure
There is a need for strong institutional roles to address the challenge of growing the 
LPG market in order to create an enabling environment that would attract investment.
National LPG Council
Whilst ultimate responsibility for the implementation of policy for the LPG sector rests 
with the Ministry of Petroleum Resources, it is recognised that other agencies of 
Government have a critical role to play in this regard. As such an LPG Council, which 
is a multi–stakeholder group led by the Vice-President will be established to serve as 
an interface body between all the agencies of government and other stakeholders in 
respect of policy issues relating to the LPG sector.


Task Forces
In order for the LPG Council to execute its role within the context of the four thematic 
topics above, the LPG Council will be constituted into four specific task forces: 
1. Availability Task Force: to focus on improving LPG supply and delivery. 
The key challenges in this area are finance and infrastructure related;
 
2 This will cost a minimum of Three Hundred and Fifty Billion Naira (N350,000,000,000) over the duration 
of 5 years (cf. several billion dollars for Indonesia).2. Accessibility Task Force: to focus on improved distribution and 
development of channels to access consumers;
3. Acceptability Task Force:
4. Affordability Task Force: tasked with driving the effort of reducing the cost 
of LPG equipment and accessories where the NLPGA has already identified a 
number of regulatory and infrastructure related costs.
Role of the Ministry of Petroleum Resources
The Ministry of Petroleum Resources shall have the responsibility to monitor and 
ensure the execution of this policy. The responsibility shall include but not limited to 
the following:
1. Constitute the various MDAs, Associations and Parastatals bodies identified in 
this policy within the National LPG Council under the various taskforces, where 
such MDAs, Associations and Parastatals bodies would be most relevant;
2. Monitor the progress of the implementation of the initiative;
3. Ensure coordination among the Task Forces, implementing MDAs and the FGN;
4. Serve as the secretariat for the LPG Council;
5. Evaluate the impact during the implementation phase;
6. Co-ordinate all activities relative to the development of the domestic LPG market.
8.5. Gaining Regional African Markets
A policy option for Nigeria is to strive to become the hub for a 
regional interconnected gas market in West and Central Africa.
This is a long-term aim because:
• Regional African gas markets are not yet big enough and have to be grown 
over time; 
• As a first step, the challenges of managing regional gas export through 
WAGP, need to be addressed and overcome.
The Nigerian government intends to learn the lessons from WAGP 
and address them, and to look for opportunities over the medium 
to long term to expand pipeline gas supplies and LNG sales to 
neighbouring African countries.
8.6. Financing Gas Projects
Gas projects need to be financed. The policy is to encourage all 
types of project financing but the Nigerian government direct 
project-financing role will be minimal in future. 



#9. DEVELOPING NATIONAL HUMAN RESOURCES
9.1. Current Nigerian Background
Some Unique Features Affecting Nigerian Local Content
The need to develop Nigerian human resources and methods for doing so, are 
described in the following sections. Much of that discussion applies to any national 
local content development plan. Nigeria though has some unique features in the 
petroleum sector which have to be taken into account and considered when 
developing a local content strategy for the nation.
Local Content in a Depressed Economy
Nigeria is now in the depths of a major recession, and early recovery may be a 
challenge.
It is more difficult to develop Nigerian local content in a low oil price environment where 
contractors are cutting jobs. Developing human resources in an environment of cutting 
human resources is not easy.
Another issue, which is more fundamental, and which has more impact in this current 
era of cost cutting, There is evidence that Nigerian contractors make projects more 
expensive. This is a more fundamental issue, which has more impact in this current 
era of cost cutting. Were it not for legislation, project developers would rather import 
foreign workers and contractors, at a lower net cost to their operations.
A policy approach is to encourage indigenous participation at competitive prices 
consistent with the law. 
9.2. Introduction
Policy Statement
Developing Nigerian human resources, to build competencies and 
capabilities to enable Nigerians take full responsibility in managing 
Nigeria’s gas resources.
Strategic Objectives
1. Enhancing the Implementation of the Nigerian Content Act;
2. Building competence across the gas industry;
3. Institutional human capacity building for the public sector and industry;
4. Instilling international oil and gas industry best practice in maintenance
and safety;
9.3. Implementing Nigerian Content Policy
Summary of Provisions of the Nigerian Content ActThe Nigerian Oil and Gas Industry Content Development (NOGICD) Act, 2010 was
enacted to ensure better development of Nigerian skills and content. The main 
concern was how to increase the participation of Nigerians in the petroleum industry, 
which has been characterised by large numbers of expatriates brought in to the 
country, at executive and even technical levels. 
NOGICD Act is an important step forward in genuinely improving Nigerian content in 
the gas industry. NCDMB has been set up to manage this and can match its database 
of Nigerian content with operators’ plans for skills needs and training.
Route to Implementation
Sometimes JV partners state that they cannot comply with some provisions of the 
NOGICD Act because the skills they seek are simply not available within the country. 
The most effective way to deal with this and to ensure compliance with the Act is to 
take steps to make those skills indeed available within the country. 
The human resources part of the gas policy therefore revolves 
around developing local content in petroleum skills and making 
that available within Nigeria. The gas policy will focus on 
developing competent workers, possibly through apprenticeships. 
9.4. Building Industry Competency
Competent Worker
There are two main ways in which skills can be acquired:
1. Formal training: whether long term or short term, normally classroom based 
teaching;
2. Supervised experience: this is practical experience in the workplace where 
training can be put into practice, and which is certified by a competent 
supervisor.
A competent worker is one who is:
1. Fully and formally trained; and
2. Qualified following examination with certification from a reputable accredited 
training institute; and 
3. Experienced with certified numbers (hours) of supervised experience in each 
of the different areas of his trade or profession; and
4. Regularly updated with new developments and techniques in his trade or 
profession and where necessary with refresher courses (this is Continuous 
Professional Development, CPD);
5. Who is certified and registered as a competent worker.Competency training has become an important part of professional training in many 
countries, and is central to much of training thinking and provision. A competency 
framework is a system of supervised and monitored relevant practical on the job 
training and also mentoring.
Nigeria needs a competency framework for the gas industry in Nigeria, operated 
nationally and in collaboration with international or national bodies who are experts in 
competency frameworks and their accreditation for the gas industry.
The traditional way of developing competency is through apprenticeships. 
Skills Development
There are four main areas for skills development:
1. Leadership: this covers the strategic management and leadership skills 
required for senior management and executive positions;
2. Management: this is general management training for middle and senior 
management and covers the whole range of skills needed to be an effective 
manager;
3. Engineering: this is graduate level engineering, for university graduates, 
whether from Nigerian or international universities;
4. Technical: this is technician level competency, suitable for those with practical 
skills, for school leavers or those with some college education. Technical skills 
include, for example, wiring or installations, pipe fitting or welding;
International Education
Obtaining good quality qualifications are the first part of the competency framework. 
The PTDF funds several schemes to provide Nigerians with good quality 
qualifications, including sending Nigerian graduates for university graduate and postgraduate training abroad. Under the gas policy this will continue.
National Education
Nigerian universities and colleges need to be encouraged to develop their abilities to 
produce good quality graduates. No matter how good a Nigerian University may 
become, employers are likely to prefer qualifications from good quality international 
universities (especially universities in the UK or USA and other parts of Western 
Europe, Australia or New Zealand).
Nevertheless, Nigerian universities need to improve such that they can be competitive 
with the best international universities for producing Nigerian graduates. One way this 
could be done (for example) is for a Nigerian university to run programmes in 
collaboration with an international university, or even for the international university to 
award their own degrees with the education delivered through a partner university in 
Nigeria. This is a model which is being increasingly used in other parts of the world, 
and will be considered by the GovernmentThere should also be collaboration among Nigerian universities and other educational 
institutions, government and the industry to develop skills which are relevant and 
necessary for the industry.
Technical & Vocational and Educational & Training TVET
Technical & Vocational and Educational & Training (TVET) is training and education 
for post - 16 school leavers. This includes apprenticeships.
Nigeria has had a good record for TVET historically, with 
technical skills accredited by the City & Guilds of the UK. Since 
approximately the 1980s though, technical training has lapsed 
significantly. There is now a large gap in the level of technical 
skills provision in the country, such that IOCs complain that they 
cannot even find petroleum welders (for example) and have to 
bring them in on expatriate packages from abroad (the costs of 
which are charged to the JV).
The gas policy recognises the need for technical training, and one of the objectives of 
the gas policy is to improve the level of technical training within Nigeria.
Supervised Experience
As already mentioned, university degrees and technical qualifications are not enough. 
There is also need to gain supervised practical experience before such personnel can 
be called competent. International accreditation bodies have approached the 
development of competences in several main ways:
1. International accreditation institutes (such as City and Guilds or the Gas 
Industry Apprenticeship Framework, both in the UK) accredit training 
organisations who provide approved courses;
2. Alternatively, international accreditation institutes (the Institute of Engineering 
and Technology for example) do not accredit training, but instead they accredit 
organisations (companies) to provide a competency based approach to enable 
engineers attain supervised practical experience that enables them to attain a 
Chartered Engineer status;
3. In some cases, an international accreditation institute could approve existing 
courses.
In order for competency development to work, there needs to be a large and dedicated 
group of experienced supervisors who can supervise and accredit the practical work 
experience of the students. These are people who are recognised internationally as 
competent who are working in the industry. Nigeria will need to ensure that there are 
sufficient numbers of competent workers in the industry who can act as supervisors 
for trainees or apprentices. In other words, a “train the trainers” programme will need 
to be set up to develop accredited work experience.It is feasible and essential to set up a competency development framework for the 
Nigerian gas industry. It is recognised though that currently there are not enough 
accredited experts to support a competency framework.
Gas Industry Expected to Develop Competency Schemes
While the Nigerian government will do what it can to build the competency building 
approach in Nigeria, the industry is expected to and will be encouraged to develop 
gas industry appropriate competency schemes. This may be together with public 
sector agencies.
The government will look to the private sector gas industry to 
develop competent worker schemes. 
Competent worker schemes may take the form of apprenticeships. The project-based
training of the NCDMB also provides a good model that could be expanded across the 
industry. Because of their international experience and expertise in this, the 
international oil and gas companies are expected to be proactive in developing 
industry wide schemes.
The government needs to make it clear to the industry what is expected from the 
industry participants, particularly the international gas companies. The industry for 
their part are expected to put in place schemes to ensure that competent gas workers 
are produced and made available to work on projects in Nigeria.
Initially competent worker schemes will be voluntary and not 
mandated by government. If however, insufficient progress is 
being seen to be achieved, the government will introduce 
mandatory measures to ensure the gas industry installs 
competency or apprenticeship schemes.
9.5. Institutional Capacity Building
Whilst clear legislation is required to move the industry forward, it is recognised that 
legislation alone will not work. A competent policy and regulatory team, 
knowledgeable across engineering, finance, law, and related disciplines etc. is also 
essential for the implementation of the policy and the law.
As well as building expertise in the national gas industry, gas 
expertise also needs to be built in the public sector, in the 
regulatory agencies and in the Ministry of Petroleum 
Resources. The government is aware of the need to build 
institutional and human capacity and intends to work with 
industry, educational partners and international development 
partners to achieve this objective.
9.6. Introducing a Maintenance and a Safety Culture
Among the most important milestones for the sustainable development of the gas 
sector is to install the highest international best practice standards of maintenancehealth and safety. Recent progress in the privatised power industry show the 
improvements that can be made in a short time when new management techniques 
are introduced.
The gas policy will insist on the best international maintenance 
and safety practices being introduced and applied throughout 
the gas industry. 
The gas policy intends to bring about legislation that will make 
Directors liable to criminal prosecution if they or their company 
employees knowingly allowed severe safety lapses that lead to 
serious damage, injury or death to premises, people or the 
environment.


#10. COMMUNICATIONS
10.1. Introduction
Communications are important parts of any gas policy. There are two fundamental 
purposes for communication of the gas policy to all stakeholders in Nigeria and 
abroad:
1. Explaining the policy;
2. Changing attitudes.
The Nigerian people, industry, international investors, even members of the 
government itself, have to a certain extent, become sceptical or cynical about reforms 
in the energy sector. On numerous occasions there have been pronouncements from 
various parts of government announcing an end to power shortages or fuel crises, but 
with no apparent change.
There also exists a gulf and lack of understanding between investors and government
of their respective expectations and obligations. 
Government will develop an appropriate communications
strategy, which will explain to all stakeholders the purpose, 
intent, thinking and analysis behind the gas policy.
Audiences need to understand that the gas policy is not a promise of when the lights 
will stay on. Instead it is to show that the Nigerian government is clear on what it wants 
to achieve, the reasons why and the steps to achieve the policy objectives. The gas 
policy will be communicated as a process to arrive at a long-term vision for the nation.
• Internal communications – audiences within government;
• External communications – other stakeholders involved with the gas industry.
10.2. Internal Communications
Ministry
Policies succeed or fail through the efforts of the civil servants and it is important that 
they are keen and active participants in the policy.
The first task therefore is to explain the policy and its implications to stakeholders 
within the Ministry of Petroleum Resources. As the government body directly 
responsible for implementing the gas policy, staff within the Ministry need to be:
• aware of the direction of the policy and the key parts of the contents;
• aware of what is required of them individually;
• persuaded of the benefits for the nation so that they can be motivated to work 
on its implementation.Other Government Entities
The same applies to other parts of government, including parastatal organisations 
such as:
• NNPC;
• NGC;
• Existing regulatory bodies such as PPPRA, DPR etc.
10.3. External Communications
Communication to Stakeholders
External communications will be needed to the other stakeholders in the Nigerian gas 
industry, covering:
• The general public;
• International investors;
• Domestic investors;
• Civil society;
• Donor community;
• Other stakeholders.
External communications to the general public and other stakeholders will largely take 
the form of media presentations and interviews, seminars, workshops, newsfeeds, 
websites, mass media and the like.
Gas Industry Involvement and Consultations
The gas industry in Nigeria has been involved in the development of the gas policy, 
through their participation of industry fora, such as the Nigerian Gas Association, the 
National Gas Flaring Committee, the National Gas Requirement Working Committee, 
the OPTS and the Petroleum Club.
This gas policy therefore, while driven by and led by the government, is a joint 
production from the government and the gas industry community in Nigeria, with 
domestic and international industry involvement.

#11. ROADMAP AND ACTION PLAN
11.1. Summary of Philosophy and Key Actions
The philosophy of the action plan for the gas policy is for the government to put the 
legislative and commercial framework in place and then let the market develop by 
itself. 
The government will set targets for market development, monitor progress and take 
appropriate actions to ensure market development takes place. However, gas 
utilisation in Nigeria is ultimately up to the private sector to deliver.
A roadmap and action plan for delivering the gas policy is set out with different scales 
for the types of activity:
• Short term: Months, up to one year;
• Medium term: One to two years;
• Long term: Longer than two years.
The roadmap presented below sets out how the gas policy will be implemented, 
according to the timescales and considering the activities and the parties involved.
11.2. Critical Policy Milestones
There are critical milestones within the gas policy that must be achieved for the policy 
to be effective. These include:
• Stakeholder consultations;
• Approval of the gas policy;
• Enactment of legislation;
• Establishment of the new single independent petroleum regulatory authority;
• Producing PSC gas terms;
• Completion of initial infrastructure, namely the ELPS 2 loop and OB3 EastWest link;
• Achieving the wholesale market / Willing Buyer – Willing Seller market status 
as rapidly as possible;
• Substantial progress towards industry wide restructuring.11.3. Short-Term Activities (Months) Institutional Level
Timescale: Months (up to one year)
Scope: Institutional
The short-term activities are those that can commence very soon and can reasonably 
be expected to be completed within a matter of months and within a year.
Those short-term activities which the Ministry of Petroleum Resources can start 
immediately are those within its direct control, namely institutional activities within the 
Ministry of Petroleum Resources and NNPC.


11.4. Medium-Term Activities (One to Two Years) Regulatory
Timescale: One to two years
Scope: Regulatory and Institutional
Medium-term activities are those which are largely (but not completely) within the 
control of the Ministry but which will take a little longer to complete.
These are mainly those activities in the legislative and regulatory areas, which set the 
framework for the gas industry and market to grow.


11.5. Long-Term Activities (Over Two Years) Industry
Timescale: Over two years
Scope: Industry 
After two years, the legislative, regulatory, institutional and commercial framework will 
be in place. The gas industry will then need to step up and implement the policy in 
terms of infrastructure projects and growing the Nigerian domestic and export gas 
market.

