Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 6
IV. Monitoring and evaluation …………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 7
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within the Cooperation Framework 
 
1.  This  country  programme  is  aligned  with  the  national  priorities  outlined  in  the  National 
Vision,  the  United  Nations  Multi-Country  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  Framework 
(UNMSDCF),  2022-2026,  and  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan,  2022-2025.  The  country  programme 
will  focus  on  supporting  climate  and  disaster  resilience  and  nature-based,  low-carbon 
development, addressing social vulnerabilities, inequalities and citizen security, and improving 
inclusive planning and delivery.  
2.  The  sustainable  development  pathway  of  Belize  has  been  compromised  by  persistent 
structural inequalities that have created societal disparities, undermined the economic and social 
rights  of  its  citizenry  and  ultimately  fuelled  high  levels  of  poverty  and  growing  instances  of 
citizen  insecurity.  The  country’s  small,  open  economy  is  driven  by  natural  resource-based 
industries.  Accordingly,  it  is  highly  vulnerable  to  external  shocks  such  as  commodity  price 
variations,  adverse  climate-related  occurrences,  and  the  economic  performance  of  its  major 
trading  partners.  In  2019,  natural  resource-based  industries  accounted  for  over  50  per  cent  of 
gross  domestic  product  (GDP),  with  an  estimated  population  of  410,695  people  and  a  pre-
COVID-19  pandemic  unemployment  level  of  10.4  per  cent.1  By  the  end  of  2020,  Belize 
recorded  a  15.5  per  cent  contraction  of  the  national  economy.2  The  COVID-19  pandemic-
induced  decline  was  mainly  in  tourism,  manufacturing  and  distribution  combined  with  a 
declining agriculture sector performance associated with climate-related effects. Since COVID-
19, the population below the poverty line has increased by almost 10 per cent to approximately 
41 per cent, higher than the average rate of the Latin American and Caribbean region.3 Belize 
recorded  11.2  per  cent  national  unemployment  (17.2  per  cent  female,  7.0  per  cent  male)  and 
21.1 per cent of underemployed (males and females experiencing similar levels). About 50 per 
cent of unemployment is due to  COVID-19-related layoffs or business failures, particularly in 
the tourism industry.4 
3.  Belize remains vulnerable to hurricanes, droughts and rising temperatures, all of which bring 
about major disruptions in agriculture productivity and exports, affecting employment, income 
generation, and food and nutrition security. 
4.  Social  protection  coverage  and  social  inclusion  continue  to  be  challenges,  especially  for 
vulnerable  groups  such  as  rural  communities,  indigenous  peoples,  women,  urban  male  youth, 
people  living  with  disabilities,  migrants,  refugees,  and  asylum  seekers.  COVID-19  has 
magnified  instances  of  differentiated  access  to  social  services,  affecting  poor  women  and 
children,  at-risk  youth  and  marginalized  populations  such  as  the  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual, 
transgender,  queer  and  intersex  (LGBTQI+)  communities.  Restricted  economic  power  has 
limited the coping and adaptive capacities of these groups and have given rise to new concerns 
of  increased  incidences  of  crime  and  sexual  and  gender-based  violence,  thereby  impacting 
business growth, investment, and prosperity in Belize.  
5.  UNDP  builds  incrementally  on  foundations  achieved  in  the  previous  programme  and 
complements developmental priorities. Lessons and best practices incorporated in the review of 
past programmes and through consultations with counterparts underscore that: (a) interlinkages 
among  issues  of  sustainable  natural  resource  management,  disaster  risk  management  and 
climate change are key and warrant multidimensional or multisector approaches; (b) given the 
natural  resource-based  economy,  environmental  sustainability  is  central  to  economic  and 
physical  recovery/development  efforts,  including  pursuit  of  low  emission  development 
strategies; (c) preventative investments (such as adaptation practices and infrastructure, disaster 
risk mitigation, rehabilitation of landscapes and seascapes) are a requirement for the reduction 
 
1 Labour Force Survey, September 2019: Statistical Institute of Belize. 
2 Statistical Institute of Belize Release February 2021. 
3 COVID-19 SEIA, 2019: UNDP. 
4 Statistical Institute of Belize April 2021 Labour Force Survey. 
2/17 
21-18012 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
of  population  vulnerabilities  and  resilience  building;  (d)  digital  disruption  is  integral  to  the 
building  of  a  resilient  nation,  effective  provision  of  social  services,  increasing  productive 
potential, and accelerating progress towards realization of the Sustainable Development Goals; 
(e) strategies  for  citizen  security  must  address  environmental/social  factors  that  reproduce 
criminal  and  violent  behaviour  and  focus  on  rehabilitation  to  prevent  recidivism;  (f) a  multi-
sectoral  approach  rooted  in  an  integrated,  comprehensive  public  sector  response  strategy  is 
required  to  effectively  address  citizen  insecurity  at  the  situational  and  community  levels;  (g) 
interventions  that  address  inequality  and  enable  the  empowerment  of  vulnerable  and 
marginalized  groups  are  required  to  realize  truly  sustainable  and  transformational  changes 
across  society;  and  (h)  weak  data  infrastructure  restricts  the  building  of  a  culture  for  data-
informed, evidence-based decision-making and programming.  
6.  The  2021  independent  country  programme  review  recognized  the  close  alignment  of  the 
UNDP country programme with national priorities and its adaptability to respond to emerging 
needs.  This  has  increased  the  confidence  of  counterparts  in  UNDP  as  a  development  partner, 
which  has  enabled  local  capacities  and  ownership  of  programmes  and  led  to  increased 
sustainability.  Programmatic  alignment  is  achieved  thanks  to  the  ongoing  UNDP  review  of 
national  circumstances  with  counterparts, 
lead  government  ministries,  key 
development  partners,  and  stakeholder  groups.  This  also  includes  participation  in  local 
structures and the annual UNDP programmatic review processes.  
including 
7.  The country programme articulates measures necessary to regain momentum to achieve the 
Goals. The application of UNDP signature solutions and the leveraging of regional and global 
networks,  programmes  and  experiences  position  UNDP  as  a  development  partner  capable  of 
providing integrated policy approaches and innovative solutions for the treatment of identified 
development challenges, and capable of enabling the structural transformations required as the 
country  builds  forward  better  in  its  recovery.    Recognizing  opportunities  for  collaboration 
offered by a diverse United Nations system, UNDP will promote greater integration of United 
Nations  programmatic  offers  for  joint  programming  to  deliver  the  multi-sectoral,  multi-
stakeholder  approach  required  to  address  the  root  causes  of  the  development  challenges 
identified comprehensively. 
 
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
8.  The vision of the country programme is to support Belize in investing in climate action and 
sustainable  natural  resource  management,  including  interventions  that  directly  promote  a 
greener  development  pathway,  exploiting  opportunities  offered  by  blue  and  green  economies, 
effective governance, and equitable creation of a safe Belizean society.   
9.  Programme  development  ran  parallel  to  the  development  of  the  UNMSDCF,  benefitting 
from  inclusive  consultations  led  by  the  Resident  Coordinator’s  Office.  UNDP  expanded  its 
national  counterparts’  engagement,  joining  UNFPA  and  the  United  Nations  Children’s  Fund 
(UNICEF)  in  socializing  common  country  assessment  (CCA)  results  and  the  prioritization  of 
together  a  diverse  group  of  actors, 
development  challenges.  Consultations  brought 
representative of the various agency mandates and the participation of traditionally marginalized 
groups, featuring prominently youth engagement.   
10.  The country programme’s overarching theory of change can be summarized as follows: if 
the  Belizean  people  and  communities  have  enhanced  adaptive  capacity  for  inclusive,  gender-
responsive  disaster-risk  management  and  climate  change  adaptation  and  mitigation,  and  if 
natural  resources  and  ecosystems  are  managed  more  sustainably  to  enhance  community  and 
people  resilience  as  well  as  shared  prosperity,  and  if  national  laws,  policies,  systems  and 
institutions  improve  access  to  justice  and  promote  peace,  social  cohesion  and  security,  and  if 
people  in  Belize  and  its  communities  have  an  improved  standard  of  living,  in  safe,  fair, 
inclusive,  and  equitable  societies,  then  sustainable  solutions  grounded  in  the  principles  of 
effective  resource  management  will  be  applied  in  securing  the  country’s  resilience  and 
21-18012 
3/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
economic prosperity, and then barriers created by systematic and structural inequalities will be 
removed enabling a safe and just Belize. 
Supporting climate and disaster resilience and nature-based, low-carbon development 
11.  In the new country programme, 2022-2026, UNDP will build on the support it provided to 
the  Government  during  the  past  Cooperation  Framework,  2017-2021,  in  updating  the  national 
architecture  that  enables  effective  and  inclusive  climate  change  management  and  includes  the 
updating  of  the  nationally  determined  contributions,  the  National  Climate  Change  Policy, 
Strategy and Master Plan and the drafting of a new low emission development strategies.  
12.  UNDP  will  support  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Economic  Development  and  Investment 
(MFEDI),  the  Ministry  of  Sustainable  Development,  Climate  Change  and  Disaster  Risk 
Management (MSDCCDRM) and the Ministry of Blue Economy and Civil Aviation (MBECA) 
and  work  with  United  Nations  organizations,  including  the  United  Nations  Environment 
Programme  (UNEP),  to  leverage  predictable  financing  from  vertical  funds  such  as  the  Global 
Environment  Facility  (GEF)  and  the  Green  Climate  Fund  (GCF)  in  support  of  capacity 
development  across  the  Government  and  involving  key  national  counterpart  organizations 
facilitating  true  integration  of  climate  change  considerations  into  national  development. 
Regional partners, including the Caribbean Community Climate Change Center, support UNDP 
in facilitating South-South cooperation partnerships with small island developing states, aiding 
capacity development processes.  
13.  UNDP  and  partners  will  also  broker  access  to  climate  financing  options  to  enable 
implementation  of  the  updated  nationally  determined  contributions  and  low  emission 
development  strategies.  It  will  also  extend  its  experience  in  climate  budget  tagging  and 
investment financial flows methodologies to support Belize in organizing its public budget and 
allocate resources for climate action. UNDP will work to promote energy efficiency within the 
transportation sector, adopting nature-based solutions for climate change, including investing in 
blue carbon, resilience building, supporting gender-just and inclusive climate change adaptation, 
and  climate  proofing  of  key  production  systems  and  population  centres.  Implementing 
nationally  determined  contributions  and  low  emission  development  strategies  provides 
opportunities  for  the  creation  of  green  jobs  and  the  empowerment  of  communities  to  localize 
climate actions effectively.  
14.  As  Belize  experiences  increasing  urbanization,  UNDP  climate  programming  will  address 
urban population vulnerability, focused on sustainable, resilient population centres. This focus is 
strategic, given the economic and social ‘co-benefits’ likely to emerge from creating sustainable 
urban environments. 
15.   UNDP  leverages  its  knowledge,  strategic  partnerships,  and  innovation  centres  in 
programme  delivery  and  builds  on  the  first  phase  of  the  Biodiversity  Finance  Initiative 
(BIOFIN)  in  promoting  alternative  sustainable  financing  opportunities  for  national  resource 
management.  Investments  secured  will  offset  resource  loss  resulting  from  the  impact  of 
COVID-19  on  the  economy  and  will  be  directed  to  programmes  supporting  biodiversity 
conservation, promotion of sustainable production systems,  ecosystem restoration and corridor 
connectivity  and  functionality,  integrated  land  and  water  resource  management  programmes 
designed  to  protect  resources,  secure  livelihoods,  and  halting  pollution  and  environmental 
degradation.  As  designed,  the  country  programme  assists  the  MFEDI,  MSDCCDRM  and  the 
MBECA in exploring opportunities linked to the sustainable exploitation of the country’s green 
and  blue  resources.  Also  important  is  support  for  the  integration  of  gender  equity  to  ensure 
communities, youth and women benefit.  
16.  UNDP will support MSDCCDRM and MBECA in securing investments in mechanisms for 
monitoring,  data  collection  and  analysis  to  realize  a  data-informed  system  for  development 
planning to incorporate climate change and natural resource management. This will enable the 
expansion  of  integrated  policy,  legislative  and  programmatic  frameworks  taking  into 
4/17 
21-18012 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
consideration  interdependencies  among  disaster  risk  reduction,  poverty,  environment  and 
climate change adaptation. 
Addressing social vulnerabilities, inequalities and citizen security 
17.  As  the  country  considers  its  advancement  as  a  safe,  fair,  inclusive,  and  equitable  society, 
addressing prevailing  inequalities  that  compromise  national  efforts and  erode gains  in poverty 
reduction and sustainable human and economic development is necessary. Unequal access and 
power  imbalances,  perpetuated  by  social  and  cultural  norms,  limit  development  opportunities, 
contribute  to  intergenerational  poverty  and  differentiated  access  to  social  services,  increase 
incidences  of  crime  and  insecurity,  and  erode  confidence  in  democratic  institutions  and 
governance systems. In response, UNDP joins UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP) 
in  supporting  the  Ministry  of  Human  Development,  Families  and  Indigenous  People’s  Affairs 
(MHDFIPA) and MFEDI in institutionalizing shock responsive social protection systems; they 
will support the enabling and enhancement of the digital architecture that expands the reach and 
efficiency  of  basic  service  delivery,  addressing  unequal  access  and  tackling  endemic  poverty 
and  vulnerability.  Interventions  target  marginalized  populations,  including  the  rural  poor, 
informal workers and women, to ensure they are not left behind.   
18.  Working  in  partnership  with  the  Ministry  of  Public  Service  Constitutional  and  Political 
Reform (MPSCPR) and the Attorney General’s Ministry (AGM), UNDP will support the good 
governance  agenda  by  expanding  the  Government’s  capacities  for  e-governance,  and enabling 
an  anti-corruption  agency,  development  of  relevant  legislation  and  regulations,  such  as 
whistleblower protection and asset declaration processes, capacity building in public service and 
advocacy for anti-corruption. This process will involve working with public sector unions and 
the  private  sector,  including  the  Belize  Chamber  of  Commerce  (BCCI).  South-South  and 
triangular  cooperation  partnerships  will  be  explored  to  facilitate  capacity  development  and 
collaborations  necessary  for  the  creation  of  joint  solutions  to  good  governance  and 
anticorruption challenges. 
19.  Within  the  context  of  relatively  high  levels  of  crime,  including  gender-based  violence, 
which  have  been  negatively  influenced  by  the  COVID-19  related  decline  in  livelihoods  and 
restrictions of activities, UNDP will continue to support the Ministry of Home Affairs and New 
Growth Industries (MHANGI), AGM, MHDFIPA and the judicial system in addressing issues 
affecting  citizen  security.  This  support  will  include  strengthening  platforms  and  capacities  for 
data  capture  and  analysis  to  inform  policies,  strategies  and  targeted  programmes.  UNDP  also 
intends to work to enhance the capacities of the judicial system for more effective, transparent 
and secure court systems, catering to the needs of families, children and victims of gender-based 
violence, as well as reducing the delayed provision of justice due to case backlogs. 
20.  UNDP will help to build prosperity and restore livelihoods with MFEDI, MSDCCDRM and 
MBECA by exploiting opportunities offered through the country’s blue and green economy that 
will bring about community co-management and the economic empowerment of underserviced 
rural  populations.  Building  on  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals  investor  mapping  exercise, 
undertaken  during  the  last  cooperation  cycle,  UNDP  will  work  alongside  national  partners  to 
promote priority development opportunities both nationally and internationally with the aim of 
stimulating private sector investments that support sustainable solutions to national development 
challenges.  Investments  to  enhance  government’s  digital  architecture  and  promote  digital 
disruption  for  micro,  small  and  medium-size  enterprises  (MSMEs)  is  expected  to  provide  a 
foundation  for  good  governance  and  expand  opportunities  for  economic  empowerment, 
particularly for the significant informal sector and those most affected by limited access to their 
markets. UNDP hopes to support the introduction of digital solutions that address the persisting 
digital  divide,  manage  transactions  at  a  distance,  foster  effective  marketing,  and  engage  with 
new and existing customers.  
21-18012 
5/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
21.  UNDP  is  expected  to  transition  from  Interim  Principal  Recipient  to  support  the  new 
Principal Recipient for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the National 
Health  Insurance  (NHI),  along  with  the  National  AIDS  Commission,  to  facilitate  universal 
health coverage and access to health care and medicines for key populations. This support will 
include  capacity  building  of  NHI  and  other  key  stakeholders  and  technical  and  administrative 
support during the transition period.  
Inclusive planning and delivery 
22.  The principles of leaving no one behind and the human rights-based approach are integrated 
across  the  country  programme,  with  interventions  designed  to  be  gender-just.  The  main 
vulnerable  groups  identified  for  this  programme  are:  (a)  women  and  girls  who  are  commonly 
disadvantaged by social and cultural norms and who commonly experience restricted access to 
opportunities, benefits and resources; (b) boys and male youth originating from impoverished, 
high-crime urban communities most likely to be at risk of coming into conflict with the law, a 
demographic  characterized  by  limited  opportunities  for  participation  in  formal  economic 
sectors;  (c)  rural  dwellers  who  are  typically  underserviced  by  national  structures  and 
programmes, whose  livelihoods and wellbeing are  commonly supported by  the  country’s very 
vulnerable  natural  resource  based  and  whose  voices  are  commonly  underrepresented  in  the 
determination  of  national  policies  and  strategies;  (d)  migrants,  asylum  seekers  and  refugee 
populations  whose  undocumented  status  forces  their  existence  outside  of  formal  national 
structures  and  restricts  their  access  to  basic  services  and  systems  of  support  (the  country’s 
migrant  population,  for  the  most  part,  participates  in  informal  economic  sectors  and  are 
commonly  subjected  to  acts  of  discrimination  and  exploitation);  (e)  LGBTQI+  communities 
facing the greatest incidences of discrimination and non-acceptance, a reality that marginalizes 
their members to the fringes of society, limiting access to basic services; and (f) the disabled and 
elderly who have limited access to opportunities and services. 
23.  The effectiveness of the UNDP programmatic offer hinges on its ability to broker effective 
partnerships,  both  nationally  and  internationally.  Existing  limitations  in  national  fiscal  space 
have limited the level of investment needed to achieve outcome goals and sufficiently advance 
the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development.  In  collaboration  with  other  United  Nations 
organizations,  including  the  United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs 
(UNDESA), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), UNFPA, UNICEF and the 
United  Nations  Entity  for  Gender  Equality  and  the  Empowerment  of  Women  (UN-Women), 
UNDP will work on the nationalizing  and localizing the Goals and support the functioning of 
the national architecture to achieve them.  
24.  In its integrator role, UNDP will coordinate delivery of the multi-sectoral, multistakeholder 
approach  required  to  address  comprehensively  the  root  causes  of  the  development  challenges 
identified.  UNDP  and  partners  are  expected  to  provide  thought  leadership  for  strengthening 
those policies, strategies and frameworks that enable sustainable development as well as pursue 
inclusive,  multidimensional,  multisectoral  approaches  to  addressing  identified  development 
challenges. Partnerships with the private sector and the Government are considered critical for 
resourcing social and economic transformative actions. Private sector entities and various non-
state  actors  also  participate  in  providing  services,  natural  resource  management,  labour  force 
development,  economic  diversification  and  reducing  inequalities  in  communities  and  rural 
agrarian  communities.  Civil  society  partners  are  expected  to  play  a  crucial  role  in  localizing 
programmatic  interventions,  contributing  to  the  leaving  no  one  behind  agenda,  and  upholding 
democratic development and human rights. 
III.  Programme and risk management  
25.  This  country  programme  document  outlines  UNDP  contributions  to  national  results  and 
serves  as  the  primary  unit  of  accountability  to  the  Executive  Board  for  results  alignment  and 
resources assigned to the programme at  the country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
6/17 
21-18012 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
country, regional and headquarter levels with respect to country programmes is prescribed in the 
UNDP programme and operations policies and procedures and internal control framework. 
26.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced  by  direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force 
majeure.  The  harmonized  approach  to  cash  transfers  (HACT)  will  be  used  in  a  coordinated 
fashion with other United Nations organizations to manage financial risks. Cost definitions and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned 
projects. 
27.  UNDP adopts a multi-tiered risk management structure (project level versus programme or 
portfolio  level)  responsible  for  tracking  critical  risks  that  can  potentially  influence  the 
programme's  delivery.  The  most  significant  of  these  risks  is  economic  recession  and  the 
shrinkage of the national fiscal space, made worse by the economic downturn associated with 
the  COVID-19  pandemic.  The  ability  of  the  Government  to  adequately  resource  economic 
recovery  interventions  and  co-finance  and  absorb  defined  development  solutions  is  currently 
influenced by its high debt (with a debt to GDP ratio of 135 per cent in 2021).  The country’s 
definition as an upper middle-income country, redefined in July 2021 to  lower middle-income 
country,  coupled  with  measures  agreed  to  reduce  the  debt  burden,  has  limited  its  access  to 
development finance. This creates a risk to the sustainability of initiatives introduced under this 
country  programme.  In  response,  UNDP  is  encouraged  to  work  with  national  counterparts  to 
identify alternative predictable funding sources and diversify strategic partnerships to deliver the 
proposed  programme.  The  strategic  positioning  of  private  sector  enterprises  to  resource  the 
sustainability  of  social  and  economic  transformative  development  actions  is  also  crucial  in 
responding to this risk.  
28.  Climate  change  –  its  associated  uncertainties  and  potential  to  rapidly  change  the  national 
context  and  circumstances  (sudden  onset  impact  events  result  in  economic  instability  and 
increased  population  insecurity)  –  is  a  key  risk  to  development  planning  and  programmatic 
implementation.  In  managing  this  risk,  UNDP  takes  into  consideration  climate/society 
relationships  in  all  its  development  planning,  considering  coping  ranges  and  contingencies  to 
address  possible  disruptions.  The  enabling  of  a  national  monitoring  and  data  management 
system for climate change allows for greater predictability and supports data informed planning, 
which can inform timely adjustments to the national development systems and pathways based 
on climate risk management.  
29.  In its definition of programmatic interventions, UNDP remains committed to the use of its 
social and environmental standards and accountability mechanism and other corporate tools that 
facilitate  early  detection  of  potential  social  and  environmental  risks.  Relying  on  corporate 
guidance,  the  UNDP  country  office  will  enable  its  grievance  mechanism  that  allows  national 
counterparts and beneficiaries to raise concerns and seek redress when it is believed that UNDP-
supported programmes may have unintended adverse social or environmental impacts.  
30.  The  systematic  use  of  HACT  by  UNDP  is  key  to  managing  fiduciary  risks  and  avoiding 
associated  reputational  risks  to  the  organization.  The  strengthening  of  capacities  of  national 
execution  partners  is  integral  to  the  reduction  of  transactional  risks.  Risk  management  in 
programmatic delivery is also enabled by strengthened capacities  facilitating UNDP execution 
of  oversight  and  quality  assurance  responsibilities.  Improved  capabilities  for  programmatic 
supervision contribute to fostering robust early warning structures. UNDP is prepared to adjust 
operations  in  line  with  corporate  processes  to  enable  adequate  response  and  continuity  in 
processes  in  its  management  of  risks  of  crises  such  as  natural  disasters  and  public  health 
emergencies.  
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
31.  In the design and development of this country programme, UNDP has ensured consistency 
and  alignment  with  the  Government  medium  to  long-term  development  goals  reflected  in  the 
21-18012 
7/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
Plan  Belize  Manifesto.  Special  consideration  was  given  to  assigning  programme  indicators  to 
ensure  that  those  utilized  could  be  serviced  by  the  national  data  collection/data  management 
architecture. Relative similarities in data requirements decrease the burden on national statistical 
systems.  Since  existing  data  series  information  can  be  harnessed  to  support  programme 
reporting,  no  significant  changes  in  measuring  processes  would  be  required  to  accommodate 
programme  reporting.  Indicator  alignment  with  UNMSDCF  also  allows  the  United  Nations 
system-wide digital platform UN-INFO to track outcome-level indicators. 
32.  The  development  of  associated  programme  monitoring  and  evaluation  functions 
incorporates national consultation findings that point to capacity limitations within the national 
statistical  system  that  limit  collection  frequency  and  analysis  of  data  associated  with  defined 
national sustainable development indicators. These limitations will inform UNDP programming 
of  investments  in  order  to  realize  the  transformation  of  data  collection  and  data  management 
systems. Improved ‘data for development planning’ is counted as key for programme delivery 
and forms a critical component of the UNDP national capacity development offer. Programme 
monitoring will be supported by enabled national structures. 
33.  The  UNDP  programmatic  offer  supports  national  counterparts  at  the  project  level  in 
utilizing  disaggregated  data  sources  in  its  measurement,  making  it  easier  to  track  those 
populations at risk of being left behind. The use of pilots in programming allows for testing the 
effectiveness  of  planned  processes,  as  seen  in  natural  resource  management,  transport  sector 
reform, and digital disruption.  
34.  UNDP-supported  initiatives  ensure  the  consistent  use  of  the  UNDP  gender  marker  to 
monitor  expenditure  and  improve  gender-based  planning  and  decision-making.  In  addition, 
where  joint  United  Nations  programmes  are  in  place,  UNDP  will  advocate  for  similar  joint 
indicators to facilitate multi-agency monitoring and tracking.  
 
8/17 
21-18012 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Belize (2022-2026)  
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Belize adopts a path to green, resilient, inclusive, and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, as it addresses the dynamic relations 
between natural resource management, climate change, disaster risk reduction and economic development.  
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): 8, 11, 13 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1: MSDCF Outcome 5: Caribbean people, communities, and institutions have enhanced their adaptive capacity 
for inclusive, gender responsive disaster risk management and climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions. 
Estimated cost by 
outcome 
(United States 
dollars) 
Cooperation Framework 
outcome indicator(s), 
baselines, target(s) 
Data source and frequency of data 
collection, and responsibilities 
Indicative country programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines, targets) 
Major partners/partnerships 
frameworks 
Indicator 1.1 Measure of 
effectiveness in national-level 
climate risk management 
Output 1.1. The Government has strengthened 
capacities to facilitate the collection, monitoring, 
analysis and use of disaggregated data to integrate 
climate change in national development planning 
effectively.  
Regular: 100,000 
• 
•  NCCO 
•  NEMO 
•  MBECA 
•  Ministry of Agriculture, 
Food Security and 
Enterprise (MAFSE) 
•  MSDCCDRM, MFEDI 
• 
•  United Nations Entities 
•  Climate change partnership 
Tracking adaptation and 
measuring development 
(TAMD) indicator framework  
Statistical Institute of Belize 
(SIB) SDG indicator platform 
•  National Climate Change Office 
(NCCO) measurable, reportable 
and verifiable (MRV) systems 
Surveys administered jointly by 
NCCO and UNDP 
Other: 20,400,000 
 
 
• 
Baseline (2021): 
(a)  Integration of climate 
 
change into planning: 6 
Indicator 1.1.1. Capacity assessment score 
card/institutional capacities for climate change 
Baseline (2021):  
(b)  Institutional 
Private sector entities 
coordination: 6 
(c)  Budgeting and finance 
(for integration and 
adaptation): 4  
• 
(a)  Capacity for the institutional, policy and 
legal framework for climate change: 34 
(b)  Capacity for the planning, implementation 
and monitoring and evaluation for climate 
change: 56 
 
 
(d)  Institutional knowledge 
(of climate change, 
adaptation and 
integration): 7 
(e)  Use of climate 
(c)  Capacity for climate change knowledge 
management: 29 
(d)  Capacity for community engagement: 14 
information (to inform 
planning): 6 
(f)  Planning under 
Target (2026):  
(a)  45 
(b)  87 
(c)  45 
(d)  23 
uncertainty (using 
appropriate information 
and methodologies): 3 
(g)  Participation (of relevant 
stakeholders in national 
planning processes): 5 
Source: NCCO (climate finance MRV portal) 
Frequency: Annually 
 
Output 1.2. The National Climate Change Office, 
with the support of UNDP, has brokered access to 
additional climate finances advancing nationally 
(h)  Awareness among 
stakeholders (of climate 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
change, risks and 
responses): 4 
determined contributions, and low emission 
development strategies implementation plans and 
investments in gender-just/inclusive climate change 
adaptation. 
 
Target (2026): 
(a) 8 
(b) 8 
(c) 6 
(d) 8 
(e) 8 
(f) 6 
(g) 8 
(h) 8 
 
Indicator 1.2.1. Amount of the new climate action 
programmes (mitigation and adaptation) resourced  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2026): 5  
Data source: NCCO (climate finance MRV portal/ 
Ministry of Economic Development Public Sector 
Investment Programme Inventory) 
Frequency: Biennially 
 
Indicator 1.2. Level of 
alignment of new policies and 
regulations to promote gender-
responsive climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, and 
biodiversity conservation, with 
international standards and 
practices (on a scale of 1 to 3) 
 
Indicator 1.2.2. (Strategic Plan indicator 4.2.1) 
Number of people directly benefitting from 
mechanisms for biodiversity, water, oceans, and 
climate solutions funded by public and/or private 
sector resources 
• 
Public sector resources 
o 
o  Male 
o 
Private sector resources 
o 
o  Male 
o 
Female 
 
Baseline (2021):  
(a) Adaptation : 2  
(b) Mitigation : 1  
(c) Biodiversity: 2 
Sex-disaggregated data unavailable 
• 
Female 
 
Sex-disaggregated data unavailable 
Target (2026):  
(a) 3 
(b) 3  
(c) 3 
Baseline (2021): TBD 
Target (2026): TBD 
Data source: Ministry of Economic Development – 
Public Sector Investment Programme; NCCO MRV  
Frequency: Annually 
 
 
Output 1.3.  The Government has expanded its 
policy and legislative environment which enables 
gender responsive and transformative solutions for 
climate change and disaster risk management. 
 
Indicator 1.3.1. Number of new gender-responsive 
policies, strategies, plans, guidelines, systems related 
to climate change adaptation and mitigation and 
disaster risk management prepared and submitted for 
10/17 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
approval 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2026): 8 
Data source: NCCO Policy MRV platform 
Frequency: Annually 
 
Output 1.4. Institutions and communities at 
national and subnational levels have enhanced 
capacities to mitigate and adapt to climate change 
and disaster risks 
 
Indicator 1.4.1. Proportion of local government 
institutions that adopt and implement local climate 
change adaptation/disaster risk management strategies 
Baseline (2022):  <5% 
Target (2026): 25% 
Data source: NCCO and National Emergency 
Management Organization (NEMO) 
Frequency: Annually  
 
Indicator 1.4.2: TAMD indicator 8: Awareness 
among stakeholders 
Baseline (2021): 4 
Target (2026): 8 
Source: NCCO-NEMO 
Frequency: Annually 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Belize adopts a path to green, resilient, inclusive, and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, as it addresses the dynamic relations 
between natural resource management, climate change, disaster risk reduction and economic development.  
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): 1, 8, 11, 12, 14, 15 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 2: MSDCF Outcome 6: Caribbean countries manage natural resources and ecosystems strengthening their 
resilience and enhancing the resilience and prosperity of the people and communities that depend on them. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions. 
Indicator 2.1 State of 
environmental performance 
and sustainability: 
Environmental Performance 
Index 
The score card measure will be 
source from the Yale University EPI 
Scorecard 
Output 2.1: The Government and natural resource 
managers apply sustainable financing solutions 
options as they expand financing for the 
sustainable use of the oceans, seas, marine 
resources, and terrestrial ecosystems 
Regular: 200,000 
•  NBio 
• 
Protected Areas 
Conservation Trust 
Forest Department  
Other 12,069,000 
 
• 
•  Department of Environment 
•  Department of Agriculture 
•  Department of Tourism 
This measure is updated annually. 
 
 
 
Baseline (2020): 57.79 
Individual measures of 
Indicator 2.1.1. Number of new sustainable financing 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
Target (2026): 57.79 
environmental health and ecosystem 
functions will be validated from 
national environmental data 
repositories, including:  
• 
mechanisms adopted by government and natural 
resource managers 
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target (2026): 4 
Source: NBio 
Frequency: Biennially   
•  MSDCCDRM 
•  MBECA 
•  MFEDI 
•  National and International 
 
Forest Department Geospatial 
Planning Unit 
conservation non-
governmental organizations  
 
•  National Biodiversity Office 
(NBio) annual reports 
•  Department of Environment 
(DOE) environmental 
management information 
systems (EMIS) 
• 
SIB 
•  MAFSE  
•  Meteorology Department 
hydrological monitoring 
platform 
•  Belize Chamber of 
Indicator 2.1.2. Amount of resources generated/ 
leveraged through application of sustainable finance 
solutions 
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target: Leveraging at a ratio of 1:3 
Source: NBio 
Frequency: Annually   
Commerce and private 
sector entities 
•  Global Environment 
Facility 
 
Output 2.2. Government natural resource 
management entities and communities adopt 
integrated land and water resource management 
solutions across critical production landscapes. 
 
Indicator 2.2.1. Measure of ecosystems connectivity 
(number of patches) 
Baseline (2018): Wetlands (565); mangroves and 
littoral forest (1,052); lowland savannah (1,151) 
Target (2026): Restrict fragmentation to within 45% 
increase of baseline numbers 
Source: Forest Department Geospatial Unit 
Frequency: Biennially   
 
Indicator 2.2.2. Hectares of land added to sustainable 
land management and restoration programme 
Baseline (2022): 0 hectares  
Target: 50,000 hectares 
Source: Forest Department Geospatial Unit 
Frequency: Biennially   
 
Output 2.3. Municipalities and communities adopt 
solutions to halt and reverse impacts associated 
with pollution and environmental degradation  
 
Indicator 2.3.1. Number of new positive response 
actions adopted for the maintenance of environmental 
12/17 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
and ecosystem integrity  
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target (2026): 15 
Source: DOE-EMIS 
Frequency: Annually   
 
Output 2.4. Local communities have improved 
access to green development opportunities linked 
to the sustainable exploitation of green and blue 
resources for expanded livelihoods, decent work 
and employment opportunities in formal and 
informal sectors 
 
Indicator 2.4.1. Number of new green jobs (formal 
and informal) and livelihood opportunities directly 
supported through UNDP programming 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 750 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annually 
 
Indicator 2.4.2 (Strategic Plan indicator 4.1.1): 
Number of people directly benefitting from initiatives 
to protect nature and promote sustainable use of 
resources:   
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target: 3,750 (Women 60%) 
Source: UNDP 
Frequency: Annually 
 
 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: The enabling of a safe and just Belizean society.  
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): 5, 10, 16 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 3: MSDCF Outcome 7: Regional and national laws, policies, systems and institutions improve access to justice 
and promote peace, social cohesion and security. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 1. Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions. 
Regular: 174,000 
Indicator 3.1. Rule of Law 
Index 
Output 3.1. Ministry of Home Affairs and New Growth 
Industry (MHANGI) and judiciary have strengthened 
capacities for the integral management of citizens’ 
security, focusing on gender and human rights 
•  MHANGI 
•  AGM 
•  MPOSCPR 
•  Office of the Chief Justice 
•  Belize Human Rights 
•  World Justice Project 
•  Office of the Chief Justice 
•  Belize Crime Observatory 
Other: 5,400,000 
 
Baseline (2020): 0.13 
Target (2026): 0.75 
(BCO) 
 
 
Indicator 3.1.1. Measure of subjective security and citizen 
perception of quality of enforcement services and 
accountability (prior survey 2013) 
Baseline (2022): TBD 
Target (2026): TBD 
Source: BCO, SIB 
Frequency: Biennially 
 
Frequency: Biennially 
Commission 
•  Belize Colby Facility 
•  BCO 
•  National Women’s 
Commission 
•  Office of the Ombudsman 
 
Indicator 3.1.2. Level of existence of multi-sectoral 
services, including platforms for access to justice available 
for victims of gender-based violence and other 
marginalized groups 
Baseline (2020): Partial 
Target (2026): Full  
Data source:  MHDFIPA 
Frequency: Biennially 
 
Output 3.2. Efficacy of the justice system with reference 
to accountable, transparent and timely judicial 
proceedings 
 
Indicator 3.2.1. Level of existence of functional digital 
case management system  
Baseline (2022): Partial   
Target (2026): Fully operational system 
Source: Judiciary Reports  
Frequency: Biennially 
 
Indicator 3.2.2. Percent change in court backlog 
Baseline (2021):  0% 
14/17 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
Target (2026): 60% 
Source: Office of the Chief Justice 
Frequency: Biennially 
 
Output 3.3. The Government adopts solutions to 
address anti-corruption and establishes clear guidelines 
and procedures for good governance through the 
passage of legislation, capacity building of differing 
branches and organs of government  
 
Indicator 3.3.1. (Strategic Plan indicator: 2.1.1):  Number 
of measures to strengthen accountability (including social 
accountability), prevent and mitigate corruption risks, and 
integrate anti-corruption in the management of public 
funds, service delivery and other sectors at: 
(a)  National level 
(b)  Subnational level 
Baseline (2022): 0  
Target (2026): 4  
Source: MPOSCPR Reports  
Frequency: Annually 
 
Output 3.4. MHDFIPA and the judicial system develop 
and pilot innovative solutions for restorative justice and 
diversion 
 
Indicator 3.4.1. Number of individuals (disaggregated by 
sex and age) accessing pilots that foster engagement and 
accountability and provide an opportunity for healing, 
reparation and reintegration  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 375 
Source: MHDFIPA, Colby Foundation 
Frequency: Annually 
 
 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15/17 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: The enabling of a safe and just Belizean society.  
Sustainable Development Goals: 3,  5, 8, 16 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 4: MSDCF Outcome 8: People in the Caribbean and communities actively contribute to 
and benefit from building and maintaining safer, fairer, more inclusive, and equitable societies. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: 2. No one left behind centring on equitable access to opportunities, and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development. 
Indicator 4.1. Citizen 
perception of adequacy of basic 
service delivery (survey) 
Output 4.1. The Government and targeted micro and 
small enterprise groups have adopted digital solutions 
for improved delivery of basic services, public service 
administration, and expansion of livelihood 
opportunities  
•  Ministry of Education, 
•  MHDFIPA, Ministry of 
the Public Service, 
Constitutional and Political 
Reform (MPSCPR) 
Regular: 189,000 
Other: 5,080,000 
Culture, Science and 
Technology 
 
•  MOHW 
•  Ministry of Sports and E-
 
Baseline (2022): TBD 
Target (2026): TBD 
 
 
Frequency: Biennially  
Governance 
•  MHDFIPA 
• 
•  United Nations 
Indicator 4.1.1. Number of digital solutions supporting 
MSMEs and livelihoods introduced with UNDP assistance 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2026): 6 
Data source: UNDP, MPSCPR, BELTRAIDE 
Frequency: Annually 
 
Private sector entities 
organizations 
•  Chamber of Commerce 
•  BELTRAIDE 
• 
 
Local community-based 
organizations and faith-
based institutions 
Output 4.2. Social protection system has increased its 
institutional capacities for a national, shock-responsive 
and gender-sensitive system  
 
Indicator 4.2.1. Percentage of population coverage under 
social safety net system 
Baseline (2019): 1.4% 
COVID-19 period (2021): 22% 
Target (2026): TBD 
Data source: MHDFIPA 
Frequency: Biennially 
 
Output 4.3. Marginalized groups (focus on women, 
indigenous and rural dwellers) are better empowered to 
gain access to basic services 
 
Indicator 4.3.1. (Strategic Plan indicator 1.3.1): Number 
of people5 accessing basic services: 
(a)  Female 
 
5 For indicators 1.3.1, 1.3.2, and 1.3.3, percentage would be computed where solid denominator values are available.  
16/17 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/BLZ/4 
 
(b)  Male 
(c)  Sex-disaggregated data unavailable 
(d)  Poor (income measure) 
(e)  Informal sector workers 
(f)  Youth 
(g)  Persons with disabilities 
(h)  Displaced populations 
(i)  Ethnic minorities 
Baseline (2021): TBD 
Target (2026): TBD 
Source: MHDFIPA/SIB 
 
Output 4.4. People living with HIV have achieved 
universal health coverage and enjoy access to quality 
essential health-care services and access to safe, 
effective, quality and affordable essential medicines  
 
Indicator 4.4.1. Number of people and children living with 
HIV currently receiving antiretrovirals  
Baseline (2021): 2,096 
Target (2026): 3,500 
Source: Ministry of Health and Wellness (MOHW) 
 
Indicator 4.4.2. Percentage of people living with HIV, and 
people at heightened risk of HIV, being linked to services 
important for their overall health 
Baseline (2022): TBD 
Target (2026): TBD 
Source: MOHW  
 
 
21-18012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17/17 
