“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
National Energy Policy Framework 
“Energy By the People … For the People” 
 
 
 
 
2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TOWARDS 
 
 
Energy Efficiency, 
Sustainability and 
Resilience for BELIZE 
in the 21st Century 
 
PREPARED for 
The GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE 
By: 
Ambrose Tillett 
Jeffrey Locke 
John Mencias 
 
November 30, 2011 
i 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
This document was prepared specifically at the request of the Government of Belize; and is intended solely for 
their  use.  It  represents  a  work  in  progress. The  views, opinions  and  recommendations  expressed  herein 
are those of the authors, unless stated otherwise. A number of data and figures presented in this document 
originate  from  data  and  figures  published  in  publicly  available  presentations  or  reports  or  gotten  from 
interviews with various public officials and other persons. Although great care has been taken to ensure the 
accuracy  and  factuality  of  the  material,  the  integrity  of  calculations,  and  all  other  information  presented 
herein, the authors do not assume any responsibility or accept any legal liability for any consequences which 
may arise from the use of the material. 
All costs and prices given in this document are in 2010 US Dollars unless otherwise stated. 
 
 
 
ii 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
 
 
“The significant problems we face 
 
today cannot be solved at the same 
 
level of thinking as when they were 
 
 
created"…. Albert Einstein 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Electric vehicles “refilling” at a solar-powered charging station1 
 
                                                        
1 SOURCE: Mukhar, N. (2011). What do Electric Cars have to do with Solar Energy? Retrieved April 2011, 
from getSolar.com: http://www.getsolar.com 
iii 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
LIST OF ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS 
AC 
Alternating Current (Electricity) 
A/C 
Air Conditioning (or Air Conditioner) 
AEI 
American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy 
Research 
AEO 
Annual Energy Outlook (EIA Publication) 
AST 
Active Solar Thermal 
BAL 
Belize Aquaculture Limited 
BAT 
Best Available Technologies 
Bbl, bbl 
Barrel 
BCCI 
Belize Chamber of Commerce and Industry  
BECOL 
Belize Electric Company Limited 
BEEC 
Building Energy Efficiency Codes 
BEL 
Belize Electricity Limited 
BELCOGEN 
Belize Cogeneration Energy Limited 
BELTRAIDE 
Belize Trade and Investment Development 
BNE 
Belize Natural Energy Limited 
BPT 
Best Practice Technologies 
BSI 
Belize Sugar Industries Limited 
BTB 
Belize Tourism Board 
BTIA 
Belize Tourism Industry Association 
BTU 
British Thermal Unit 
BZ 
Belize 
BZD 
Belize Dollar 
oC 
Degrees Celsius (Measurement of temperature) 
CA 
Central America 
CARICOM 
Caribbean Community 
CBA 
Central Building Authority (Belize) 
CBO 
Congressional Budget Office (USA) 
CCGT 
Combined Cycle Gas Turbine 
CCS 
Carbon Capture and Sequestration 
CDB 
Caribbean Development Bank 
CDM 
Clean Development Mechanism 
CER 
Certifiable Emission Reduction (per CDM) 
CF 
Capacity Factor 
CFC 
Chlorofluorocarbon 
CFE 
Comisión Federal de Electricidad (Mexico) 
CFL 
Compact Fluorescent Lamp 
CHENACT 
Caribbean Hotel Energy Efficiency Action Program  
CHP 
Combined Heat and Power 
CIA 
Central Intelligence Agency (USA) 
CIF 
Cost, Insurance and Freight 
iv 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
CIPS, CIPower 
Canadian International Power Services Inc. 
CNG 
Compressed Natural Gas 
CO2, CO2 
Carbon Dioxide 
COP 
Coefficient of Performance (Heat Pumps) 
CPRSA 
Cost of Power Rate Stabilization Account (BEL) 
CP 
Carbon Pricing 
CPV 
Concentrator Photovoltaic 
CREDP 
Caribbean Renewable Energy Development 
Programme 
CRS 
Congressional Research Service (USA) 
c-Si, C-Si 
Crystalline Silicon (Solar PV) 
CSP 
Concentrating Solar Power 
CTZ 
Constant-Temperature Zone 
DA 
Distribution Area (Belize) 
DAO 
Distribution Area Operator (Belize) 
DC 
Direct Current (Electricity) 
DG 
Distributed Generation 
DNI 
Direct Normal Irradiance (Measured in kWh/square 
meter/day) 
DTI 
Department of Trade and Industry (United Kingdom) 
€ 
EU Currency Symbol 
EE 
Energy Efficiency 
EEP 
Energy and Environment Partnership with Central 
America 
EER 
Energy Efficiency Ratio 
EERE 
Energy Efficiency & Renewable Energy (of the US 
DOE) 
EGS 
Enhanced Geothermal System (or Engineered 
Geothermal System) 
EIA 
Energy Information Administration (United States) 
EPA 
Environmental Protection Agency (United States) 
EPC 
Energy Performance Contract 
ESCO 
Energy Service Company 
ESMAP 
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program 
(World Bank) 
ESP 
Energy Supply Provider 
ETSAP 
Energy Technology Systems and Analysis 
Programme (IEA) 
EU 
European Union 
EV 
Electric Vehicle 
oF 
Degrees Fahrenheit (Measurement of temperature) 
FAO 
Forestry Administration Organization 
FC 
Firm Capacity 
FFV 
Flex Fuel Vehicle 
v 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Feed-in Tariff 
FIT 
Feet  (Measurement of length or distance) 
ft 
Foreign Exchange 
FX 
Gram (Measurement of weight) 
g 
US gallons (Measurement of volume) 
gals 
Green Building Certification (Belize) 
GBC 
Global Climate & Energy Project 
GCEP 
Gross Domestic Product 
GDP 
Green House Gas 
GHG 
Government of Belize 
GOB 
Geology and Petroleum Department (in the Ministry 
of Natural Resources, Government of Belize) 
GPD 
Gallons per Passenger-mile 
g/p-m 
Gallons per Mile 
gpm 
Ground-source Heat Pump (Geothermal Heat Pump) 
GSHP 
General Sales Tax (Belize) 
GST 
Gas Turbine 
GT 
Gigawatt 
GW 
Gigawatt-hour 
GWh 
Hydro-chlorofluorocarbon 
HCFC 
Hot Dry Rock (Geothermal Systems) 
HDR 
Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
HEV 
Hydrofluorocarbon 
HFC 
Heavy Fuel Oil 
HFO 
High Pressure (Steam) 
HP 
Heat Transfer Fluid 
HTF 
Heating, Ventilation and Air-conditioning 
HVAC 
Hydro-electric Power 
Hydro 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
IAEA 
Internal Combustion Engine 
ICE 
Inter-American Development Bank 
IDB 
International Energy Agency 
IEA 
Independent Power Producer (Electricity) 
IPP 
International Organisation for Standardization 
ISO 
Kilogram 
kg 
Kilojoule 
KJ 
Kilometre 
km 
Square Kilometre  
km2 
Kilovolt 
KV 
Kilowatt 
KW 
Kilowatt-hour 
KWh 
Kilowatt-year 
KW-Yr 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
LAC 
vi 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Levelized Cost of Delivered Energy 
LCODE 
Levelized Cost of Energy 
LCOE 
Lower Calorific Value 
LCV 
Light-emitting Diode 
LED 
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
(USA) 
LEED 
Linear Fluorescent Lamp 
LFL 
Litre of Gasoline Equivalent 
LGE 
Liquefied Natural Gas 
LNG 
Liquefied Petroleum (Gas) 
LP 
Liquefied Petroleum Gas 
LPG 
Long-run Marginal Cost 
LRMC 
Low Speed Diesel 
LSD 
Metre (Measurement of length or distance) 
m 
Square Metre  
m2 
Metres per Second 
m/s 
Mercado Eléctrico  Regional (Regional Electricity 
Market of SIEPAC) 
MER 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
MIT 
Megajoule 
MJ 
MMBTU 
Million British Thermal Units 
mpg 
Miles per Gallon 
mph 
Miles per Hour 
mpk 
Miles per Kilowatt-hour 
MRV 
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (for GHG 
emissions) 
MSD 
Medium Speed Diesel 
MSW 
Municipal Solid Waste 
MW 
Megawatt 
MWh 
Megawatt-hour 
NECC 
National Electricity Control Center (Belize) 
NEEPI 
National Energy and Electricity Planning Institute 
(Belize) 
NEMS 
National Energy Modeling System (United States) 
NEP 
National Energy Policy (Belize) 
NEPD 
National Energy Policy Development (Belize) 
NETS 
National Electricity Transmission System (Belize) 
NETSO 
National Electricity Transmission System Operator 
(Belize) 
NG 
Natural Gas 
NGL 
Natural Gas Liquid 
NGO 
Non-Government Organization 
NMS 
National Meteorological Service (Belize) 
NPV 
Net Present Value 
vii 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (United 
States) 
NREL 
Organization of American States 
OAS 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development  
OECD 
Organización Latinoamericana de Energía (Latin 
American Energy Organization) 
OLADE 
Operations and Maintenance 
O&M 
Petroléo de Venezuela, S.A  
PDVSA 
Primary Energy Equivalent 
PEe 
Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle 
PHEV 
Particulate Matter 
PM 
Power Purchase Agreement (Electricity) 
PPA 
Parts per Million 
ppm 
Production Tax Credit 
PTC 
Public Utilities Commission (Belize) 
PUC 
Photovoltaic 
PV 
Research and Development 
R&D 
Research, Development and Demonstration 
RD&D 
Renewable Energy 
RE 
Request for Proposal 
RFP 
Renewable Fuel Standard 
RFS 
Renewables Obligation 
RO 
Renewables Obligation Certificate 
ROC 
ROLEDA 
Rural or Low-Energy Density Area 
RPS 
Renewable Energy Portfolio Standard 
RSA 
Refer to CPRSA above 
scf 
Standard Cubic Feet (Measurement of volume) 
SCGT 
Simple Cycle Gas Turbine 
SIEN 
Sistema de Información Energética Nacional 
(National Energy Information System of OLADE) 
SIEPAC 
Sistema de Interconexion Eléctrica de los Paises de 
America Central (Electricity Interconnection System 
of the Countries of Central America) 
SLC 
Single Large Consumer (Belize) 
SPE 
Society of Petroleum Engineers (USA) 
sq 
Square 
SUV 
Sport Utility Vehicle 
tCO2e 
Metric Ton of CO2-equivalent (of GHG emissions) 
T&D 
Transmission and Distribution 
TES 
Thermal Energy Storage 
TJ 
Terajoule 
TOE 
Tonne (Metric Ton) of Oil Equivalent 
TOR 
Terms of Reference (for this Report) 
viii 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Time of Use 
TOU 
Total Primary Energy Supply 
TPES 
Tropical Studies and Development Foundation 
(Belize) 
TSDF 
University of Belize 
UB 
United Kingdom 
UK 
United Nations Environment Programme 
UNEP 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change 
UNFCCC, FCCC 
United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
UNIDO 
United States (of America) 
US, USA 
United States Dollar 
USD 
United States Department of Energy 
US DOE 
United States Green Building Council  
USGBC 
Vehicle Average Fuel Economy 
VAFE 
Watt (Measurement of power) 
W 
World Business Council for Sustainable Development 
WBCSD 
World Economic Council 
WEC 
World Energy Outlook 
WEO 
World Health Organization 
WHO 
Wind Power Density 
WPD 
Waste-to-Energy 
WTE 
 
 
 
ix 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
List of Acronyms & Abbreviations ................................................................................. iv 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................. 1 
Background ............................................................................................................................ 1 
Main Study Outputs .............................................................................................................. 2 
Proposed Goals and Strategies for Belize’s Energy Sector ............................................ 2 
Energy Plans .................................................................................................................................... 4 
Policy Recommendations ........................................................................................................... 5 
Energy Planning ................................................................................................................................ 6 
Energy Sector Restructuring ........................................................................................................ 6 
Indigenous Energy Supply ............................................................................................................. 7 
Energy Imports and Exports ...................................................................................................... 14 
Energy Distribution Infrastructure & Pricing ..................................................................... 15 
Financing for Indigenous Energy Development ................................................................ 21 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation ....................................................................................... 22 
Financing for Energy Efficiency and Recoverable Energy Projects ............................ 28 
Implementation Plan ................................................................................................................. 29 
A National Database of Energy Data and Information ..................................................... 29 
An Organizational Structure to Move Us Forward ............................................................ 29 
x 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
xi 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
“If I am asked today what is the most important issue for global 
security and development - the issue with the highest potential for 
solutions, but also for serious problems if we do not act in the right 
way - it is Energy and Climate Change.” 
Jose Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission (EC), Opening 
Speech at World Energy Congress held in Rome, Italy on November 2007  
 
BACKGROUND 
 
How can we make the most of the energy resources available to us to serve our 
economic and social needs in the present and in the foreseeable future as cost-efficiently 
 
as practicable, while simultaneously mitigating the ravages of energy price volatility and 
Pierre Gadonneix, Chairman, World Energy Council 
the environmentally-damaging effects of fossil fuel use? What part can we play to ensure 
that future generations are not relegated to diminished lifestyles or even mass calamity 
because of the way we harness and use energy now, but that they are instead 
bequeathed stable supplies of efficient and clean energy? What opportunities can we 
forge to take advantage of our unique position as a relatively energy abundant country 
in the midst of burgeoning demand all around us in the Central American mainland?  
The short answer is that we must transition to a path of efficient and sustainable 
energy, and build resilience within our energy supply chain(s) by using “effective rules 
and smart policy frameworks”. 
This Draft National Energy Policy Framework (NEPF) is a recommended roadmap that 
puts Belize on a path to energy efficiency, sustainability and resilience over the next 30 
years. It provides policy recommendations to policy-makers and decision-makers, and – 
where appropriate - discusses the pros and cons of various policy instruments that can 
be used to achieve policy objectives. 
The approach taken in formulating this draft NEPF comprised of six main activities: 
1)  Assessing the major factors driving energy policy-making in the 21st Century.  
2)  Carrying out a brief overview of the main trends and players that are currently 
impacting and that may continue to impact the global and regional energy market, 
followed by a fairly in-depth analysis of the current state of Belize’s energy sector in 
terms of the inter-relationships between supply and demand, the cost of energy, and 
the related GHG emissions of the different sub-sectors.  
3)  Conducting a comprehensive assessment of the main supply options, both 
indigenous and external to Belize, available now and in the near future to meet our 
energy needs.  
1 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
4)  Analyzing various end-use efficiency and conservation measures that can be put in 
place to reduce local demand for energy.  
5)  Developing goals and strategic objectives for Belize’s energy sector, and formulating 
and evaluating various plans for meeting these strategic energy objectives, and 
which utilize, to varying extents, the supply options and end-use efficiency measures 
referred to above.  
6)  Recommending specific policies for ensuring the realization of the optimal energy 
plan (from above) which best achieves the proposed strategic objectives over the 
planning horizon, as well as general policies and a supporting organizational 
framework for administering and guiding the development of the energy sector as a 
whole in line with these strategic objectives.  
MAIN STUDY OUTPUTS 
Proposed Goals and Strategies for Belize’s Energy Sector 
Goals 
  To foster the sustainable production, distribution and use of energy as a critical 
resource needed to achieve the overarching national goals of economic growth and 
long-term prosperity, security, poverty reduction and social equity. 
  To minimize the cost of energy in the local economy: 
o  The cost of energy referred to is the net present cost of energy use by final end-
users, and should take into account all capital, O&M and fuel costs of primary 
energy capture and conversion, including conversion losses and costs of 
environmental impacts; all capital and O&M costs of secondary energy 
distribution, including distribution losses and costs of environmental impacts; 
and all capital and O&M costs of secondary energy conversion to end-use energy, 
including conversion losses and costs of environmental impacts. 
o  The benchmark for this goal could be the average cost of energy in those 
emerging economies with similar socio-economic structure to Belize or countries 
who are our major competitors. However, this may be too low or too high 
depending on our own unique circumstances relative to theirs, and it is best that 
energy cost minimization be subject only to availability of resources and 
technologies and other uncontrollable factors. Moreover, the cost of energy is 
very dependent on the nature and composition of a nation’s produce. Countries 
like Belize that feature mainly light industries such as Tourism generally 
consume less energy per dollar of GDP than energy-intensive countries that 
engage in heavy industries like cement making and steel production. For this 
2 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
reason, the energy intensity, which is the total primary energy supply per dollar of 
GDP, may also used as a reliable indicator of the cost of energy. 
  To mitigate the impacts of uncontrollable events such as external market price and 
supply shocks and natural disasters on the cost of energy and on the reliability of 
energy supply. 
  To create a national energy-efficiency-focused culture that is fully aware of how its 
actions (or inactions) affect energy use and that is pro-active about the conservation 
and efficient use of energy. 
Strategies 
1)  Elevate and promote the importance of planning for energy efficiency in all sectors of 
the economy. 
2)  Promote and support the production of energy from indigenous renewable resources 
in order to promote sustainability, increase resilience and engender local 
participation in the energy industry 
3)  Preserve, develop and manage the Agriculture, Agro-Processing and Forestry Sectors 
as a major source of biomass feedstock for energy production. 
4)  Pursue both resource and geographic diversity of the supply mix in order to 
maximize the resilience of the energy sector. 
5)  Develop an energy-for-export industry aimed at supplying the regional and other 
foreign markets over the long term. 
6)  Build a modern and robust electricity distribution infrastructure to foster greater 
energy efficiency and resilience and provide infrastructural support for the 
electricity-for-export industry. 
7)  Nurture the crude oil industry as a for-export industry.  
8)  Put in place measures to maximize the production of non-crude oil products from 
petroleum extraction activities.  
9)  Develop a local electricity micro-generation market where small producers, such as 
individual households, communities, commercial establishments and even small 
industrial participants, can sell electricity into local distributions systems and the 
national grid.    
10) Promote and support local participation in the energy supply industry in order to 
build support for renewable energy initiatives, increase local input and control over 
the local petroleum industry, and generate employment and economic opportunities 
locally.  
3 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
11) Provide access to cleaner and more versatile energy carriers in rural areas and 
populations living on the margins of the socio-economic fabric as part of broader 
initiatives of the GOB and NGOs to improve the standard of living and productivity in 
these areas. 
12) Promote the adoption of energy efficiency and conservation measures in energy 
applications throughout all sectors of the economy. 
13) Promote the adoption of energy efficient equipment and devices throughout all 
sectors of the economy. 
14) Institute a price on carbon in line with binding covenants such as the Kyoto Protocol 
and in harmony with the evolution of the global carbon market. 
Energy Plans  
The team formulated three plans designed to follow the path directed by the strategies 
introduced above. These plans are not optimal but are rather indicative and can serve as 
starting points for further more optimal variations that can be explored in a future study 
if so required. 
  An ‘end-use-centric’ plan that seeks to reduce demand via the least-cost mix of end-
use efficiency and conservation measures without further development of any of our 
renewable energy resources. 
  A ‘supply-centric’ plan that seeks to put in place the least-cost supply mix to meet all 
our energy demands without concern for end-use efficiency or conservation. 
  A ‘comprehensive’ plan that uses both the least-cost mix of end-use efficiency and 
conservation measures to minimize energy use, and the least-cost supply mix, with 
further renewable energy development. 
Each plan was formulated to achieve the following measurable objectives, which are for 
the most part derived directly from the strategies above:  
Plan Objectives  
  Minimize the cost of energy use 
  Minimize the amount of GHG emissions 
  Maximize the renewability index (RI); that is, the percentage of indigenous 
renewable energy in the total primary energy supply mix 
  Maximize production of energy from indigenous sources (Minimize dependence on 
foreign energy sources)  
  Maximize the diversity of the energy supply mix  
  Maximize the use of electricity in the secondary energy supply mix  
4 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Overview of Results – Plan Performance 
The table below gives the results of key aggregated performance indicators for the 
various plans over the 30-year planning horizon. It should be borne in mind that these 
plans are fairly conservative and do not take into consideration any possible gains from 
energy exports or other spinoff effects on the energy sector or the wider economy or 
society as a whole.  
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  Baseline Plan 
Plan A 
Plan B 
Plan C 
$3,206,418,586 
$3,073,966,847 
$2,961,116,791 
$2,798,608,329 
Net Present Cost of Energy 
Supply (USD) 
$468,891,516 
$433,438,097 
$414,976,848 
$340,433,237 
Net Present Cost of 
Emissions (USD) 
$3,675,310,102 
$3,507,404,944 
$3,376,093,638 
$3,139,041,565 
Net Present Cost of Energy 
Supply inc. Emissions (USD) 
17,226,531 
15,449,375 
15,161,820 
12,106,393 
Total Foreign Oil and 
Electricity Imports (BOE) 
68.72% 
67.17% 
55.78% 
52.72% 
Average Dependence on 
Foreign Imports 
28.57% 
31.67% 
40.1% 
46.15% 
Average Renewability Index 
42.67% 
38.52% 
35.66% 
33.7% 
Average Resource Diversity 
Index 
16.74% 
17.79% 
17.45% 
17.79% 
Average Electricity as % of 
Secondary Energy 
Consumption 
Table A: Comparison of Plans - Results of Key Aggregated Performance Indicators 
The results clearly show that all three alternative paths – Plan A, Plan B and Plan C – are 
improvements on the ‘Continue-Business-As-Usual’ (Baseline) Plan. 
Plan C for instance would yield the following improvements over the Baseline Plan: 
  A 14.6% reduction in net present cost, which works out to nearly $57 million USD 
per year or nearly 4% of GDP. 
  30% reduction in foreign imports of fuel (including electricity imports). 
  Over 60% increase in use of renewable energy. 
  21% increase in the diversity of energy supply sources. 
  Just over 6% increase in the permeation of electricity within the secondary energy 
supply mix. 
Policy Recommendations 
The plans introduced above chart possible courses forward, given the data and 
information on hand, that should enable us to realize our goals for Belize’s energy sector 
over the planning horizon. Plans, especially, of such a broad scope and which potentially 
involve hundreds of projects distributed over a wide cross-section of the economy, can 
5 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
only be brought to fruition if proper policies are in place to stimulate, guide and 
coordinate action. 
The policy recommendations highlighted below are intended to serve two main 
purposes:  
  To support the plans formulated in the previous section or subsequent iterations of 
or updates to these plans; 
  To generally administer and guide the development of Belize’s energy sector along 
the path of efficiency, sustainability and resilience and towards meeting the goals and 
supporting the strategies proposed in the previous chapter. 
It is important to note that these policies are in most cases co-dependent and mutually-
reinforcing; and so the effectiveness of any individual policy will largely depend on how 
it fits into the entire portfolio of policies being put forward. 
Energy Planning 
  Establish a National Energy and Electricity Planning Institute 
  The NEP Team recommends that GOB set as its first and immediate priority the 
establishment of a National Energy and Electricity Planning Institute (NEEPI), 
with responsibility for formulating energy plans and policies in coordination with 
relevant stakeholders, for disseminating these plans and policies to relevant 
stakeholders (after the requisite approvals have been gotten), and for monitoring 
and enforcing – where applicable – adherence to these plans and policies by the 
bodies charged with administering them.  
  Setup an Energy Sector Planning Framework 
  The NEP Team recommends that a robust standardized planning framework be 
setup and adopted by the NEEPI to guide the process of formulating a least-cost 
long-term plan(s) for the further development of Belize’s Energy Sector along the 
path of sustainability and resilience.  
Energy Sector Restructuring 
  Re-structure the Electricity Industry to cater for Clearer Lines of Responsibility 
and to prepare for the Evolution of an Export Market as follows: 
  The center of the new structure will be the National Electricity Transmission 
System (NETS); consisting of transmission and sub-transmission lines and cables, 
transmission substations, and a National Electricity Control Center (NECC).  
  Each load center will be regarded as a Distribution Area (DA). DAs will be 
connected to and purchase power and energy from the NETS via one or more 
6 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
connection points (substations) for on-selling to final consumers, or they may 
supply energy from their own generation facilities if not connected to the NETS.  
  One or more Single Large Consumers (SLCs), who require a separate and 
exclusive high-voltage connection to the NETS, may also be directly connected to 
and purchase power and energy from the NETS via one or more connection 
points (substations). An SLC may be located outside of Belize’s national borders. 
  Generating stations or energy supply providers (ESPs) will be connected to and 
sell power and energy to the NETS via one or more connection points. These ESPs 
will bid for and enter into contracts with the NETSO to provide power and energy 
as required. An ESP may be located outside of Belize’s national borders. 
  Establish Roles and Responsibilities for Electricity Supply and Transmission 
Planning  
  Put in place framework for Leasing of Electricity Transmission Capacity and 
Wheeling  
  Put in place framework for Electricity Buyback between Distribution Area 
Operator and Customer 
  Formulate and Implement a Regulatory Framework for Petroleum Fuel Supply 
and Distribution  
 
In order to prepare for a possible transition from a monopolistic to an 
oligopolistic supply arrangement in petroleum fuel supply into Belize, given the 
opportunity to take advantage of the Petro-Caribe offer an also the prospect of 
introducing biofuels and blended fuels into the local market, Government should 
set up a formal regulatory framework to regulate and preserve (the viability of 
the) downstream fuels sector, including issuing licenses, setting and enforcing 
quality standards and setting prices. 
  This responsibility for putting this regulatory framework into effect should be 
assigned to the PUC, and a Director of Fuel Supply should be hired to work on 
setting up the new regulatory framework. 
Indigenous Energy Supply 
Optimal Utilization Land and Natural Resource for Energy Supply 
  Enact Legislation to Vest Ownership of Natural Resources in People of Belize 
  Review and Revision of All Energy Supply Contracts that use the Natural 
Resources of Belize to reflect the Provisions of the Policy Recommendation 
Above 
  Particular attention is hereby drawn to one such clause that currently exists in 
the contracts for the supply of hydropower from BECOL. This clause states that 
7 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Fortis/BECOL has the right of first refusal for all contemplated hydro 
developments along the Macal River and for that matter all other rivers of Belize, 
and is clearly a contravention of the spirit of the proposed requirement that 
ownership of Belize’s natural resources should at all times remain vested in the 
People of Belize. 
Promote Local Content in Indigenous Energy Projects 
  Maximize Local Benefit from and Local Control of Undertakings that process 
Belize’s Indigenous Resources  
Renewable Energy Development 
  Commission Natural Resource Use Planning Study  
  A natural resource inventory study should be commissioned under the direction 
of the Ministry of Natural Resources in order to catalog the types, quantities and 
locations of Belize’s natural resources both terrestrial and marine areas. The 
results of this study should be documented in a database such as a GIS and used 
to produce resource contour maps. 
  Conduct Inventory of Energy Production Potential of Natural Resources  
o  The following projects should be given special priority as part of the inventory 
study: 
1)  Country-wide Wind Speed Mapping Project  
2)  Country-wide Hydrological Data Collection and Monitoring Project 
3)  Geological and Hydro-geological Inspection of the Most Promising Sites for 
Future Utility-Scale Hydropower Development  
  Conduct Pre-Feasibility Assessment of Implementing GSHP-based Cooling for 
Buildings in Selected Urban Areas   
  Ensure Optimization of Indigenous Energy Conversion Processes  
  The pre-feasibility or feasibility study of any project that exploits our natural 
resources should include an investigation into the expected output of the 
resource site using best available technologies and optimum project parameters 
compared with the expected output using the proposed technology and project 
parameters, and also a benefit-cost analysis of the optimum versus the proposed 
project. The results of the investigation and analysis should be reviewed by the 
NEEPI in order to determine if the project as proposed should be approved, 
assuming that it is feasible, or if an effort should be made to undertake a project 
with parameters that are closer to those of the optimum project.  
8 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  Renewable energy-based facility owners should be required to take the necessary 
steps to improve the efficiency of energy conversion processes if found to be 
below the currently-applicable required standard or benchmark. If a significant 
new technology improvement has become commercially available after the initial 
deployment of the project facility, the NEEPI will investigate the economic and 
technical feasibility of upgrading the facility with the new technology, and if 
found to be feasible, the facility owner will be required to upgrade the facility 
with the new technology.  
Facilitate Renewable Energy Development Process 
  Demarcate and Designate Renewable Energy Zones 
  These zones should be the best available sites for renewable energy development 
with minimal environmental impact, and should be afforded the same 
protections, under law, which are currently given to nature reserves. 
  Licenses should only be approved for renewable energy projects which are to be 
developed within the renewable energy zones. Such a map will be useful as a 
guide for potential investors who would normally have to spend an inordinate 
amount of time doing investigative research. 
  Promulgate Best Practices for Renewable Energy Projects  
  Setup facility to Provide Assistance to Potential Renewable Energy Developers  
  The NEEPI should setup a facility within its organization to provide full 
assistance to potential renewable energy developers from project idea and 
feasibility study, through acquiring the necessary financing, to final licensing by 
the relevant authority. This facility will provide information on relevant policies 
and the permitting process in general, give advice on best available sites for 
renewable energy development, and expedite the acquiring of necessary permits 
and licenses. 
 
Introduce Transmission Network for Renewable Energy Development Credit 
Incentive 
 
In order to further encourage the development of renewable energy projects, 
GOB should setup a Transmission Network Development Credit Incentive: giving 
a fixed amount of tax credit (to the NETSO) for every mile of transmission 
network that passes through any of the designated renewable energy zones.  
 
Introduce Annual Renewable Energy Portfolio Standards for Each Renewable 
Energy Type 
 
Introduce Annual Minimum Feed-In Tariffs for Each Renewable Energy Type 
Build Public Awareness and Acceptance of Renewable Energy Projects 
9 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
Introduce Renewable Energy Technologies in School Curricula  
  Setup Renewable Energy Projects for Demonstration and Educational Purposes  
Manage impacts of Indigenous Energy Projects on Local Communities 
 
Institute Measures to Mitigate Visual and Environmental Impacts of Renewable 
Energy Projects on Local Communities   
  Encourage Participation of Local Communities in Renewable Energy Projects  
  Where a renewable energy project is to be sited within or near to a particular 
community (or communities), then the project developer will be required to 
source as much of its unskilled labor requirement as possible from the particular 
community (or communities). 
  At least 10% of the ordinary shares of the business vehicle carrying the 
renewable energy project should be made available to members of the local 
community in which the project is sited. 
  At least 25% of the ordinary shares of the business vehicle carrying the 
renewable energy project should be made available to citizens of Belize as a 
whole. 
Indigenous Petroleum 
  Apportion Petroleum Royalties to Areas That Could Be Most Negatively 
Affected by Petroleum Production-Related Activities 
  Government could build support for petroleum exploration and subsequent 
production activities by pledging allocation of a portion of petroleum royalties for 
use in areas that could be most negatively affected by petroleum-related 
activities as follows: 
  When production occurs onshore or in lakes or rivers: 
a)  50% to be committed to the Government for financing projects and paying 
obligations as it sees fit; 
b)  10% to the Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment for 
financing programs supporting scientific research, technology 
development and capacity building applied to the petroleum industry; 
c)  10% to be allocated to a special Environmental Risk Management and Oil 
Spill Mitigation Fund (ERMOSM) used for financing programs supporting 
scientific research, technology development and capacity building applied 
to environmental risk management and oil spill prevention and mitigation 
activities; 
10 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
d)  15% to the Ministry of Tourism and the BTB for financing terrestrial 
infrastructure and capacity building projects; 
e)  10% to be used for financing projects aimed in the district where the 
production occurs; 
f)  5% to be used for financing projects in the municipalities where the 
production occurs. 
  When production occurs offshore: 
a)  40% to be committed to the Government for financing projects and paying 
obligations as it sees fit; 
b)  10% to the Ministry of Natural Resources for financing programs 
supporting scientific research, technology development and capacity 
building applied to the petroleum industry; 
c)  15% to be allocated to a special Environmental Risk Management and Oil 
Spill Mitigation Fund (ERMOSM) used for financing programs supporting 
scientific research, technology development and capacity building applied 
to environmental risk management and oil spill prevention and mitigation 
activities; 
d)  15% to the Ministry of Tourism and the BTB for financing marine 
infrastructure and capacity building projects; 
e)  20% to be used for financing projects in the district or caye fronting the 
area where the production occurs; 
  Earmark Local Crude Oil and its Products for International Markets 
  Locally-produced crude oil and any locally-refined oil products should be 
earmarked for international markets, with the exception of crude oil, HFO and 
diesel that can be used in the industrial sector. Promoting the sale of oil and oil 
products locally could potentially cause policy conflicts with the NEP Team’s 
recommendations for reducing dependence on fossil fuels in general. 
  Maximize Processing of Associated Gas of Crude Oil Extraction  
  Government should commission the GPD to conduct a study of the potential for 
further processing of the associated gas from Belize’s current petroleum 
extraction operations into useful hydrocarbons (particularly for electricity 
generation, transport, cooking and for use as a refrigerant fluid for cooling) using 
best practice technologies and best available technologies, and to prepare a cost-
benefit analysis of the various options available. 
  Enact Legislation to ensure that Government Royalties should be tied to Full 
Production Potential of the Petroleum Production Site  
11 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  The calculation of the total royalties attributable to the GOB should be based on 
the full production potential of the extracted petroleum resources using best 
practice technologies applicable to the particular petroleum production site. On-
site usage and resource losses - such as flaring of associated gas - that exceed 
industry benchmarks applicable to the site, given its characteristics and the 
nature of its operations, should be counted in this production potential. 
  Current legislation should be updated to reflect this principle. 
  Demarcate an Offshore No-Drill Zone with Barrier Reef as Center-line 
  An offshore no-drill zone should be demarcated to maintain the barrier reef and 
cayes at a sufficiently “safe” distance from any offshore oil drilling rigs in order to 
mitigate the visual impacts of oil rigs on the natural seascape in the area of the 
barrier reef and cayes and to reduce the probability of the spread of effluent from 
potential oil spills into these areas. 
  Formulate a National Petroleum Safety and Oil Spill Mitigation Standard 
  A National Petroleum Safety and Oil Spill Mitigation Standard should be 
formulated to guide action to prevent and mitigate the impacts of oil spills, 
accidents and other environmental disasters, and should reflect the latest post-
Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill mandates put into effect by the USA.  
  Form a National Petroleum Safety and Oil Spill Mitigation Authority 
  A National Petroleum Safety and Oil Spill Mitigation Authority should be setup 
with responsibility for enforcing adherence by all operators to the National 
Petroleum Safety and Oil Spill Mitigation Standard and for formulating, directing 
and coordinating the Spill Mitigation and Containment Emergency Response 
Plan.  
Biofuels 
  Pursue Biofuels Development within Broader National Development Context 
  Following in the footsteps of other developing countries, Belize should develop 
its biofuels industry to contribute to larger environmental and social objectives 
such as rural development, land rehabilitation and waste treatment apart from 
GHG emissions reduction. 
  Biofuels development initiatives that target the use of semi-arid soils and other 
marginal lands should be promoted to enhance biodiversity, revitalize natural 
ecosystems, support the development of rural populations in poorer regions, and 
hence maximize the efficiency of the utilization of our natural resources. 
  Promulgate National Biofuel Product Standards 
12 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  As a first step toward creating a viable market for biofuels in Belize, the NEEPI 
should prepare a set of biofuel standards for the major classes of biofuels, bio-
ethanol and bio-diesel, as well as standards for feedstock inputs into biofuel 
production. 
  The development of these standards should be guided by international and 
regional standards such as those currently being prepared by the ISO.  
  Develop the Biofuels Industry along the lines of the Most Efficient Bio-Energy 
Chains 
 
In keeping with long-term energy supply development plans, the Government 
should focus on using biomass residues, including bagasse and other agricultural 
and forestry wastes (except wood fuel), for electricity generation, sugar cane for 
ethanol production, and jatropha, other local oil-producing plants and , in the 
future, alga-culture for biodiesel production. 
  Ethanol production should be focused on supplying the local blended fuel market, 
for use in the transesterification process of local biodiesel production, and for 
export to the USA and Europe. Given our comparative advantages in biomass-
based electricity generation and biodiesel production, these bio-energy chains 
should be optimized for sufficing local requirements and for export. 
  Promulgate Biofuel Production Technologies that cater to Multiple Feedstocks 
and Small Scale Deployment 
  Conduct a Cost-Benefit Analysis of Upgrading BSI’s Refinery Infrastructure for 
Dual Sugar/Ethanol Production  
  Promote Local Biofuels Research 
  The Government should actively promote and support research into ways to 
improve the productivity and sustainability of biofuel feedstocks: by seeking 
improved yields from conventional feedstocks through better agricultural and 
forestry practices, by exploring the potential for cultivation of native perennial 
lingo-cellulosic crops (e.g. jatropha) throughout the districts, and by developing 
breeding programs for higher-yielding species and novel energy crops, such as 
algae. 
  Belize, through the Ministry of Agriculture, UB and the TSDF, is already party to a 
2009 Memorandum of Understanding signed with Mexico, the rest of Central 
America, Colombia, and the Dominican Republic for further collaboration and 
research in the biofuels field. The GOB is strongly encouraged to use this platform 
as a launch pad to start up an International Biofuels Research Center within the 
University of Belize, in conjunction with the National Coordination Committee for 
Agricultural Research and Development (NCCARD), to attract the inflow of 
13 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
international funding, best available technologies and technical expertise into 
Belize.  
  Seek Technical Assistance for Biofuels Industry Development from Industry 
Leaders, particularly Brazil and the USA  
  Encourage Public-Private Investment Partnerships to support Smallholder 
Participation in Biofuel Value Chains  
  The GOB should encourage public-private sector investment partnerships in the 
commercial scale production of biofuels in order to facilitate smallholder 
participation as much as possible in biofuel value chains. This may be mandated 
by requiring that say 20% of the shareholdings in such partnerships are open to 
take up by such smallholders. 
 
Introduce Annual Renewable Fuel Standards for Each Biofuel Type 
 
Introduce Annual Minimum Feed-In Tariffs for Each Biofuel Type 
Micro-Generation 
  Commission Study on Impacts of Micro-Generation on Grid Electricity Supply 
Operation, Reliability and Cost  
  Establish Formal Energy Buyback Pricing and Payment Scheme for Micro-
Generation 
  The NEP Team recommends the adoption of two pricing schemes for energy 
buyback from micro-generation sources: 
  Micro-generation from residential premises that have a maximum power output 
up to 200 KW should be priced on the basis of a basic net metering-based energy 
buyback scheme. 
  Pricing for micro-generation from sources with a maximum power output above 
200 KW should be based on a gross metering (two-meter) arrangement, where 
the total quantity of energy exported can be tracked separately.  
  Formulate Interconnection Standards for Micro-Generation Sources 
  Establish Energy Buyback Rules 
  The NEP Team recommends that the PUC draft and, after consultations with the 
relevant energy stakeholders, implement Energy Buyback Rules to underpin 
agreements for energy buyback between electricity providers and micro-
generators and that are based on the following principles: 
Energy Imports and Exports 
Electricity Imports 
14 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
Investigate the Technical and Economic Feasibility of Upgrading the 
Interconnection with Mexico 
  BEL is currently unable to take more than 50 MW of power from Mexico without 
experiencing voltage regulation problems at certain load center bus bars. CFE has 
indicated that it is prepared to supply up to 60 MW to Belize as long as certain 
power flow conditions are met. 
  The NEP Team recommends that BEL urgently look into the technical and 
economic feasibility of making the necessary transmission system upgrades to 
overcome these problems so that full advantage can be taken of the supply from 
CFE. 
  Limit Maximum Amount of Total Foreign Electricity Imports 
  Limit Maximum Term of Contracts for the Import of Electricity 
Electricity Exports 
  Seek Membership or Direct Involvement in SIEPAC 
  BEL and the GOB should vigorously pursue membership or direct involvement in 
SIEPAC as a long term measure in order to enhance the security of electricity 
supply but more importantly to be in a position to sell energy to the SIEPAC 
market in the future.  
In the short-term, access to the SIEPAC market can be arranged by supplying 
 
excess energy to Mexico and/or Guatemala. The GOB and BEL should immediately 
pursue this opportunity by writing a formal letter to CFE asking if this 
arrangement (with Mexico) can be setup. This action is critical to the 
development of an electricity-for-export industry. 
  Limit Participation in Contracts to export Electricity to ESPs only 
  Only authorized ESPs should be allowed to enter into contracts with foreign 
entities to export electricity. The authorization to enter into such contracts should 
be conferred as a special provision of the terms and conditions of the license of 
the particular ESP at the request of the ESP and must be approved by the GOB 
acting on the advice of both the NEEPI and the PUC. 
  All other non-authorized ESPs and all DAOs and SLCs should be expressly 
excluded from participating in such contracts with foreign entities to export 
electricity. The NETSO can be a party to such a contract only to extent that it is 
required to provide facilities for transmission of the power and associated energy 
from the ESP to the connection point with the foreign entity. 
Energy Distribution Infrastructure & Pricing 
15 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Transmission & Distribution Lines 
  Revise Transmission Line Construction and O&M Standards in anticipation of 
and in preparation for further connection of the NETS with regional electricity 
transmission networks to accommodate electricity importation and 
exportation transactions with regional partners 
  Formulate plans for the Transition to a Smart Grid Electricity System in order 
to facilitate and foster grid connection of utility-scaled renewable energy 
sources such as wind and solar energy plants and micro-generation sources in 
general 
  Prepare an Updated Transmission Grid Code to accommodate Variable Power 
and Micro-Generation Sources 
Rural Electrification 
  Demarcate and Declare Rural or Low-Energy Density Distribution Areas 
(ROLEDA) 
  Once an area is so declared, it is subject to rural standards for energy supply and 
distribution; and is eligible for certain special funding, subsidies and tariffs 
applicable to ROLEDAs. 
  Formulate Separate Rural Electricity Distribution Standards, which minimize 
the cost of construction while maintaining adequate service reliability 
concomitant with the purposes of electricity use in ROLEDAs 
  Setup a Special Rural Electricity Pricing Mechanism 
 
Influence pattern of development of Rural Energy Services to maximize use of 
renewable energy-based community-managed distributed generation sources 
Electricity Pricing 
  Conduct a study should be undertaken to derive formulae, and to develop a 
software tool that uses the formulae, for calculating the LRMC and the SRMC of 
electricity supply.  
 
Implement a New Consumer Electricity Tariff-Setting Methodology  
  A study should be undertaken to investigate and assess the current electricity 
tariff-setting methodology employed by the PUC and to come up with a new 
methodology that removes price distortions and that reflects key pricing 
principles, including cost reflexivity, revenue adequacy, stability, flexibility and 
transparency. 
 
Introduce Special Electricity Tariffs for SLCs  
16 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  Electricity tariffs charged to SLCs, who are connected directly to the NETS, should 
only bear their share of costs related to energy supply, transmission and 
connection to the NETS, and should not bear any distribution-related costs.  
  Likewise, high-voltage consumers who are connected directly to the high-voltage 
distribution network of the DA in which they are located should only bear their 
share of costs related to energy supply, transmission, high-voltage distribution, 
and connection to the high-voltage network, and should not bear any low voltage 
distribution-related costs. 
 
Introduce a Two-Part Electricity Tariff for All Consumers 
 
In keeping with the principles of transparency and revenue adequacy in tariff-
setting, a two-part electricity tariff, consisting of a periodic fixed charge and a 
volumetric energy charge, should be applied to all customers.  The periodic fixed 
charge should reflect the provider’s fixed costs, while the volumetric energy 
charge is the cost of energy.  
 
Introduce a Time-of-Use Electricity Tariff for Major Electricity Consumers  
 
Introduce a Seasonal Electricity Tariff for Major Consumers 
  BEL’s cost of energy supply is higher during the “dry season” because of reduced 
output from the hydro plants and BELCOGEN, which are currently its lowest cost 
energy supply sources, resulting in greater dependence on supply from electricity 
imports and diesel generation. 
  Due consideration should be given to implementing a seasonal electricity tariff 
schedule - comprising a relatively lower energy charge for electricity during the 
“wet season” and a relatively higher energy charge during the “dry season” – 
initially for customers who consume electricity above a certain threshold level 
and later for all consumers. This would have the effect of communicating the 
correct price signal to such consumers; who could change their consumption 
habits in step with the energy charges. It could also provide a steadier stream of 
cash flows into BEL. 
  Remove Rate Stabilization for High-Consumption Customer Accounts 
  Rate stabilization should not be applicable to customers who consume electricity 
above a certain threshold level – particularly SLCs, high-voltage, commercial and 
industrial customers – and who can therefore have a significant impact on overall 
cost borne by other consumers if they suddenly close their electricity accounts. 
Moreover, this is the class of consumers that is best able to respond – and whose 
response yields the most significant economic impacts - to the correct price 
signals that tend to be distorted by rate stabilization mechanisms.  
  Commission a study of the impact of rate stabilization on electricity prices and 
consequent consumer behavior should be commissioned with a view to 
17 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
determining if rate stabilization, as currently implemented, is efficacious; and 
to consider alternative methodologies for effecting rate stabilization.  
Fuel Industry Regulation & Pricing 
  Re-evaluate Belize’s Future with Petro-Caribe  
  Regardless of any ulterior motives on the part of Venezuela, Belize can benefit 
significantly from the low cost financing terms offered under the Petro-Caribe 
Agreement: gaining nearly $15,000,000 USD per year if all our gasoline and diesel 
requirements are supplied from Venezuela.  
  Petro-Caribe represents an opportunity for Belize to gain substantial revenues 
from favorable financing terms, diversify its imported petroleum fuel supply 
sources, and establish a significant relationship with an important petroleum-
rich regional partner. 
  Government should revitalize this now defunct arrangement on the conditions 
that GOB is completely satisfied that the supply from Venezuela will be reliable 
and that importers can make their own shipping arrangements in order that the 
costs of freight and insurance can be sufficiently reduced so that the benefits 
obtained from the low cost financing are not negated. 
  Once the arrangement has been revived, a portion of the gains from the favorable 
financing terms made available to the Government should be used to offset the 
per-unit CIF cost differential, if any, between the supply from Petro-Caribe and 
the traditional supply from Esso on a month-by-month basis, in order to equalize 
the CIF cost borne by the various importers in each month. 
  Establish a Temporary Methodology for the Stabilization and Rationalization 
of Fuel Prices  
 
In keeping with the principle of stability, transparency and simplicity, fuel prices 
should in the meantime and pending the outcome of a Fuel Price-Setting 
Methodology Study be fixed on a month by month basis (from the 1st day through 
to the last day of the month). The price for the next month should be based on the 
average CIF cost of all fuel received over the last 10 days of the previous month 
and the first 20 or 21 days of the current month, and should be advertised at least 
five days before the start of the next month. Importers should be required to 
standardize order amounts as much as possible. 
  Given the relatively small cost of transportation as a percentage of total fuel 
price, a country-wide standard transportation charge should be introduced to 
cover the cost of transportation. While transportation companies will still be 
remunerated according to the current schedule of charges, final consumers will 
see one fixed charge regardless of where fuel is purchased. 
18 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
Implement a New Refined Petroleum Products, Biofuels and Fuel Blends Price-
Setting Methodology  
  A study should be undertaken to investigate and assess the current refined 
petroleum products price-setting methodology employed by the GOB and to 
come up with a new methodology that also provides for pricing of biofuels and 
fuel blends, removes price distortions and that reflects key pricing principles, 
including cost reflexivity, revenue adequacy, stability, flexibility and 
transparency. 
Internalization of the Costs of GHG Emissions and Other Pollutants 
 
Implement GHG Pricing in Local Economy   
  Government should, through its membership on regional and international 
bodies and participation in regional and international forums, vigorously lobby 
for agreement on adopting a fair and consistent global carbon pricing regime, 
that is implemented incrementally so as to give less developed countries 
sufficient time to make required adjustments, and where developing countries 
are required to pay a proportionate part of the cost of making these adjustments. 
 
In the meantime, Belize must begin the process of preparing our local economy 
for the inevitability of the adoption – or imposition – of this global carbon pricing 
regime in a way that does not cause undesirable distortions and without putting 
our export-oriented industries at a disadvantage to other countries - especially 
direct competitors - that are slower to introduce a carbon-pricing regime. We 
recommend three complementary courses of action: 
o  Setting up of a pilot baseline-and-credit regime with the following parameters:  
1)  This pilot should be regarded as a test run for a possible future regime and 
should therefore cause no financial or economic consequences on the 
companies involved. The main objective is to develop the institutional 
structures required, to instill the required institutional discipline in the 
administrators and participants for measuring, reporting and verifying 
relevant emissions data, to get the actors accustomed to operating – 
particularly trading credits - within the new regime, and to document the 
actual trends in carbon intensity.  
2)  A baseline should be set for each industry/sector – on an annual basis - 
according to regional benchmarks and historical trends.  
3)  It should be setup with no formal ties to any other global, regional or 
otherwise extra-national carbon emissions reduction regimes. It should 
initially cover only the major GHG-emitting sectors including electricity, 
petroleum, transportation, and major industries. 
19 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
o  Implementing a carbon tax on petroleum and other fossil fuels used in transport 
and for electricity generation.  
1)  The level of such a carbon tax should be dictated by the global GHG emissions 
market price. The main focus of the tax at this juncture is to curb domestic 
consumption from – and hence production of - products with a relatively 
higher carbon footprint to products with a relatively lower carbon footprint. 
2)  The tax must be accompanied by an appropriate rebate for all export-oriented 
industries in order to ensure that the competitiveness of our exports is not 
adversely affected by the additional cost (tax burden). 
3)  It is not to be used as a revenue generator for government, but as an economic 
price signal: the proceeds, less the rebates, are therefore to be re-distributed 
back to tax-payers – particularly the lower income classes - in the form of a 
lower income tax or subsidy. Redistributing the carbon tax proceeds as a flat 
dividend (e.g. x dollars per person or household) will diminish the negative 
income distribution effect of the tax on lower-income classes. 
o  Belize must continue to take advantage of the CDM and any other beneficial 
opportunities for obtaining carbon finance for undertaking economically feasible 
renewable and energy efficiency projects. Aside from the institutional structures 
being put in place to prepare us for an impending global carbon regime, the CDM 
should, at this time, be used solely as a source of low-cost finance and subsidies 
for eligible RE and EE projects; and not as a framework directly dictating any 
national or sectoral strategy. 
  Evaluate Cost of Impacts of Non-GHG Pollutants on Belize’s Economy  
Energy Supply Resilience 
  Establish Strategic Petroleum Stock Levels for all refined fuel types at the 
national level and at each major population center level to better manage the 
uncertainty of supply and the price volatility of petroleum imports and to 
protect against extended disruptions of fuel supply due to disasters 
  Establish Requirement for Geographic Diversity of Electricity Supply Sources 
in evaluation criteria of RFPs for electricity supply  
  Build Resilience into the National Electricity Supply Network by developing a 
smart grid overlay of the national electricity system in order to mitigate 
disruptions of electricity supply 
  Setup standards to ensure that Power Lines, Wind Turbines and Solar Panels 
are built and installed to withstand Extreme Weather Conditions 
  Setup a Self-Insurance Scheme of the National Electricity Supply Network 
against Potential Loss from Natural and Other Disasters 
20 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Financing for Indigenous Energy Development 
Our analyses of the various energy supply options – wind power, solar PV, hydro, 
biomass, biofuels, solar thermal energy for water heating, GSHP for cooling and heating 
– have shown that, based on the project economics alone and without taking potential 
carbon savings into account, almost all of these renewable energy forms are ready for 
deployment in Belize. There is no need therefore for any preferential above-market 
price incentives to be given to any renewable energy development projects, 
except perhaps for PV and offshore wind. What is needed are supporting frameworks 
and financing mechanisms that cater to the unique characteristics of such renewable 
energy investments, namely: more costly feasibility and siting studies, high upfront 
capital costs, output variability, and carbon savings. 
  Sponsor country-scoped studies to gauge the energy production potential of 
our natural resources (wind, hydro, geothermal, biomass, biofuel etc) and 
prepare resource potential maps so as to defray costs that individual project 
developers would have had to bear on their own if they had to search for 
optimum areas for renewable energy development from scratch. This is also 
important for securing the necessary financing: 
  These studies should also include undertaking pilot/demonstration projects for 
technologies that have not so far been deployed on a commercial scale in Belize 
to gain a better understanding of the particular challenges that could be faced 
when deploying and operating plants based on such technologies under local 
conditions. 
  Provide  non-traditional innovative financing mechanisms for RE developers 
that incorporate flexibility in repayment schedules or government guarantees 
to bridge the gap between the fixed repayment commitments and varying 
energy revenues 
  Use revenues derived from redeeming CERs earned through participation in 
the CDM and other GHG reduction programs to offset operational expenditures 
and debt servicing costs.  
  Set up a Green Investment Bank is to vest the decision-making process for 
financing renewable energy projects and the expertise for making such 
decisions in a single entity 
  Through this arrangement, Government will also be able to implement innovative 
financing models such as packaging smaller projects into one proposition for 
greater management efficiency and taking advantage of special financing streams 
such as programmatic CDM; streamline and provide better oversight and control 
of the renewable energy project financing process; and attract and aggregate 
equity and debt capital from various sources into one pool. Importantly, one such 
21 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
source (of capital) could be the local populace: thus providing yet another avenue 
for them to participate in the new renewable energy economy. 
  Bolster the Green Bank’s mission by providing interest rate and other 
subsidies for initial feasibility and siting studies and mandating special 
financial incentives (FITs, PTCs etc) for early demonstration of near-
commercial technologies.  
Energy Efficiency and Conservation 
 
Incorporate planning for energy efficiency beyond the energy sector and at the 
very highest levels of national strategy formulation by avoiding the building of 
unnecessary energy loads into long-lived assets and hence our way of life 
  The macro-level energy efficiency impact – that is, the effect of a project on the 
energy efficiency of the nation as a whole - should therefore be a fundamental 
criterion and determinant in all major economic investment decisions. Planning 
  Establish Requirement of Cost Neutrality of Imposed Efficiency Standards 
  That is, the projected energy savings resulting from energy efficiency upgrades 
should as a minimum cover the estimated incremental cost of the upgrade plus 
any associated incremental costs of O&M on a net present value basis measured 
over the lifetime of the upgrade.  
  Limit Total Financial Incentives & Penalties Applicable to Energy Efficiency 
Projects 
  The policy planning process must therefore ensure that the total 
financial/economic incentives that can be applied to a specific project for 
achieving a particular EE target do not exceed the total net energy savings that 
can be gained from achieving the target.  
Transportation 
Instigate change-over to More Energy-Efficient and Environmentally-
Friendly Vehicles and Modes of Transport 
  Adopt Vehicle Average Fuel Economy (VAFE) Standards 
  The NEEPI should each year prepare the Recommended and Minimum VAFE 
Standards (miles per gallon or miles per KWh for EVs) for brand-new vehicles 
classified by class – for example, light-duty pickup trucks or large buses - and fuel 
type. The VAFE for mass transport vehicles should be expressed in person-miles per 
gallon. 
22 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  Require that Permission for Vehicle Importation and Vehicle Licensing be tied 
to the Minimum VAFE Standard  
 
Introduce Cash-for-Scrap Program  
  Once permission to license a vehicle is denied on the basis of its assessed fuel 
economy, then the owner of the vehicle would be eligible to receive a cash rebate 
in return for scrapping the vehicle.  
  Require that Vehicle Import Duties and Vehicle Licensing Fees be tied to the 
Recommended VAFE Standard 
  Promote VAFE Standards to Lending Institutions for Inclusion in criteria for 
Approval of Vehicle Loans 
  Commission Research into Use of Biofuels and Fuel Blends as Alternative 
Vehicle Fuels 
 
 Launch a Country-wide Campaign to promote the Benefits of Walking, Cycling, 
Carpooling and Mass Transport 
  Do Study on Urban and Interurban Mass Transport System in Belize to 
determine Required Service Standards, Required Service Infrastructure, Costs 
and Pricing Policies 
Build Driver Awareness of Factors influencing Vehicle Efficiency 
  Revise Driver Licensing Examination Content and Other Requirements 
  Prepare and Disseminate Vehicle Fuel Efficiency Handbook 
 
Implement a Smart Driver Training Workshop for Heavy-Duty and Mass 
Transport Vehicle Drivers 
 
Implement a Smart Fleet Manager Training Workshop 
Influence Behavior towards More Efficient Vehicle Operations and 
Maintenance Practices 
  Launch an EE in Transport Rating Program underpinned by Mandatory Audits 
of Mass Transport and Freight Carriers Companies 
  Revise Pre-requirements for Vehicle Licensing 
  The pre-requirements for vehicle licensing should be upgraded to include a pre-
requirement that the condition of the vehicle assessed at the time of the licensing – 
such as condition of lube oil and tires (rolling resistance) – as it affects the overall 
fuel economy of the vehicle should meet minimum acceptability levels.  
  Enforce Vehicle Speed Limits on Highways for all vehicles including mass 
transport buses by instituting highway traffic patrols on the major highways  
23 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
Build Mobile Efficiency into Urban Plans 
  Restrict Heavy Vehicle Traffic through Urban Areas 
  Reduce Traffic Congestion within Belize City and along the Main Routes leading 
into Belize City during Rush Hours 
 
Investigate various options for reducing traffic congestion within Belize City itself 
and along the main routes leading into Belize City during rush hours. Some of 
these options could be: 
1)  Converting the main highways and arteries into Belize City into four-lane 
routes (two-lanes in each direction) with each of the incoming lanes joining a 
different main street within Belize City. 
2)  Setting up a tolling system for incoming traffic along the Northern Highway 
Entrance. The toll fee should vary by time of day – higher during rush hours - 
and should not be applicable to mass transport vehicles. Eventually, this 
tolling system can be upgraded to enable electronic operation, where 
electronic sensors installed at the tolling booth identify a vehicle and 
automatically charge the owner’s credit or debit card. 
3)  Carving out or reclaiming (from the seashore) a right-of-way going 
completely around Belize City’s shoreline to be used for a free way that 
segues from the main highways and arteries, before their entrance into Belize 
City proper, and joins into its main streets along the circular route. The right-
of-way should also provide for large-scale parking space along the shoreline 
outside of the central Belize City areas.  
4)  Building an Urban Electric Tram Transport System through Belize City and 
concomitantly banning vehicle traffic along the tram routes.  
5)  Building motor-cycle and bicycle paths along with pedestrian walkways along 
tram routes to encourage less energy-intensive and healthier forms of 
mobility. 
Buildings, Lighting & Cooling 
Stimulate (consumer) investment in energy efficient homes and 
buildings 
  Update Building Codes to reflect Mandatory Energy Efficiency Provisions 
  Establish a Mandatory Green Building Certification Program for Domestic and 
Commercial Buildings to encourage a shift towards low-carbon, zero-energy or 
even energy-plus buildings.  
24 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  The certification rating awarded could be based on a building’s score in a number 
of categories, including: provision for day-lighting and natural light sensors in 
lighting systems, incorporation of occupancy sensors in lighting systems, use of 
solar lighting technologies, provisions for passive cooling using natural 
ventilation, provision of energy-efficient window glazing and frames, insulation 
of roofs and walls, air-tightness of the building envelope, provisions for use of 
geothermal cooling and solar cooling technologies, provisions for use of solar 
water heating technologies, use of indigenous materials, adequacy of internal 
electrical wiring, provisions for water conservation, and proximity to urban 
centers.  
  Require New Government Buildings to be Zero-Energy or Energy-Plus 
Buildings 
  Promote Green Building Certification to Lending Institutions as a part of 
Lending Criteria for Home and Commercial Building Mortgages 
  Require that Property and Property Sale Taxes be tied to Green Building 
Certification Rating       
 
Introduce a Voluntary Energy Efficiency Improvement Program for 
Commercial & Services Sector 
  This program will entail conducting energy audits of the facilities and buildings 
each of the participating companies to be conducted every two years. These 
audits should cover mainly lighting, cooling and heating systems with a view to 
detecting inefficient components and systems and system leakages, evaluating 
maintenance practices, and seeking opportunities for renewable and recoverable 
energy use. 
  Encourage Provision for Vents in Rural Households where Wood Fuel Cooking 
is done 
Stimulate (consumer) investment in energy efficient appliances 
 
Implement a Country-wide Project to Change-over from Electric Incandescent 
to Solar and Electric Fluorescent and LED Lamps 
 
Implement a Country-wide Project to Change-over to Hybrid Solar-Electric 
Street Lights 
  Lower Import Duties on Solar and Electric Fluorescent and LED Lamps relative 
to Incandescent Lamps 
 
Introduce Energy Labeling of Appliances 
  The intention is to increase consumer’s awareness of the real energy use of 
household appliances at the point of purchase through a liable and clear labeling. 
25 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
 
Introduce Recommended and Minimum Appliance Energy Efficiency Standards  
  Require that Appliance Import Duties be tied to the Recommended Appliance 
Efficiency Standard 
  Require that Permission for Appliance Importation be tied to the Minimum 
Appliance Energy Efficiency Standard  
  Rationalize Import Duties on Solar and Geothermal Cooling and Heating 
Equipment relative to Electric Air-conditioners and Water Heaters 
  Require Mandatory Use of Solar Water Heaters 
  Government should mandate that all water heating used in residential and 
commercial buildings should be provided by solar technology. The importation of 
electric-only water heaters should be halted immediately. 
  Setup Program to Replace Traditional Wood Stoves with New Improved Wood 
Stoves for Cooking and Water Heating 
  Set up of a National Laboratory for Testing of Appliance and Equipment Energy 
Performance 
Influence Consumer End-Use Energy Consumption Patterns 
 
Initiate a Country-wide Campaign to Install Occupancy Sensors in Government 
Office Buildings, Commercial Buildings and Hotels 
 
Initiate a Country-wide Campaign to Install Natural Light Sensors in 
Government Office Buildings, Commercial Buildings and Hotels 
  Encourage Use of Energy Monitors in High Energy Consumption Residential 
and Commercial Buildings 
  Prepare and Disseminate a Residential and Commercial Energy Efficiency 
Handbook and Website 
Industry 
  Encourage Participation in Voluntary Certification Programs for Energy 
Efficiency Improvement  
 
Introduce Voluntary Target-Setting Agreements for Energy Efficiency 
Improvements  
  The GOB should setup a Voluntary Energy Efficiency Improvement Program 
whereby an individual industrial company can voluntarily enter into an 
agreement with the GOB to achieve certain energy efficiency targets within a 
certain time frame, in return for receiving technical and financial support and 
other economic incentives such as tax breaks and import duty reductions. 
26 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  BSI/BELCOGEN is currently Belize’s single largest consumer of energy, and the 
single largest producer of energy. This company must therefore be singled out for 
special immediate attention for energy efficiency improvements, and should be 
required to enroll in the Efficiency Improvement Program. 
 
Implement Mandatory Energy Audits that are tied to Licenses, Concessions and 
Other Economic Incentives  
  The GOB should mandate that all companies operating within certain high-
priority industries, and that are not engaged in its Voluntary Energy Efficiency 
Improvement Program, be required to undergo regular energy audits as a 
condition of their license to operate or for the continued receipt of other 
economic incentives and concessionary benefits. 
  Place a High Priority on Exploitation of Opportunities for Waste Heat Recovery 
and Waste Reuse as Feedstock  
  Require that Energy Manager/Coordinator Position be setup within Certain 
Industrial Companies  
  Foster a Corporate Culture focused on Energy Efficiency 
  Establish a Leadership in Energy Efficiency Recognition Program 
  An annual recognition program should be launched to honor the top-performing 
companies and executives who had a transformational impact on energy 
efficiency improvement in their enterprise or in Belize as a whole. 
Agriculture & Forestry 
  Launch a Renewable Energy for Agriculture Program  
  The GOB should launch a Renewable Energy for Agriculture Program to encourage 
the use of renewable energy technologies in farms and agro-processing: including 
solar crop dryers; solar water heating for dairy operations and pen and 
equipment cleaning; solar PV solutions for small motors, lighting and water 
pumping, especially in remote off-grid farms; and wind-pumping solutions for 
irrigating agricultural fields with surface water and pasturelands from 
underground aquifers. 
  Support Local Research of and Education of Farmers in Low-Energy 
Agricultural Practices in order to wean the modern agricultural production 
systems off their heavy dependence on fossil fuels for energy, fertilizers and 
pest management 
  Measure Biomass Production Potential of Forestry, Agro-Processing and 
Industrial Activities  
27 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  This study should also classify these biomass-producing sites by output potential, 
determine the locations of these sites and come up with more precise costs for 
collecting biomass from dispersed locations to central locations.  
  Commission a Cost-Benefit Analysis of Commercialization of Dried Fuelwood 
Processing and Distribution   
  The GOB should commission a study into the commercial arrangements that can 
be implemented to collect and deliver wood to a central facility for proper drying 
and controlled distribution in the communities that are dependent on its use for 
cooking and water heating.  
Education and Information Dissemination 
  Ensure that Government plays a Visible Leadership Role in Promulgating 
Policies issued by NEEPI  
  Disseminate Success Stories to Gain Support for and Encourage Participation in 
Programs 
  Successful outcomes of programs as whole, especially voluntary programs, and of 
individual instances should be publicized so as to gain support for and encourage 
participation in programs.  
Capacity Building 
  Build Strong Technical and Scientific Education Foundation to support Local 
Energy Development 
Financing for Energy Efficiency and Recoverable Energy 
Projects 
Government Programs 
  Provide full subsidies for initial energy audits particularly for larger 
commercial and industrial EE projects on the condition that, once these 
companies are made aware of the potential for savings and hence for 
increasing profits, they should find ways to access the capital needed for the 
upfront investment. 
  Provide residential consumers or even smaller commercial consumers with 
free technical assessments of the retrofits needed to upgrade the buildings 
they own in order to meet the minimum GBC rating 
Financial Institutions 
28 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
  Encourage  lending institutions to factor energy cost savings into interest rates 
(to reduce them) and building worth valuations (to increase them), and to 
formulate and promote mortgage packages with clear links to GBC levels 
  Provide a GOB guarantee for the energy efficiency portion of the loans on the 
condition that this guarantee is also factored into the overall mortgage interest 
rate for the particular loan application  
ESCOs 
  Put in Place Institutional and Legal Framework to Foster the Development of 
ESCOs in Belize 
  Encourage the Use of Programmatic CDM Financing for ESCOs 
  Programmatic CDM allows for a single entity to manage and coordinate a number 
of smaller CDM-eligible projects under a single program manager. ESCOs should 
be encouraged to consider signing up as CDM program managers in order to take 
advantage of carbon credits earnable by EE projects included as part of a 
registered CDM program that otherwise could not be cost-effectively earned by 
the project owner on his own. The CERs earned may be used to help finance the 
initial investments needed for the EE projects, resulting in further benefits for 
both ESCO and participant.  
Implementation Plan 
A National Database of Energy Data and Information 
The number one priority of the NEEPI must be to develop a vast compendium of 
continuously-updated data and technical knowledge that form the basis of an energy-
economic model and that can be fed into a computer-based tool – whether a basic home-
grown spreadsheet tool or a more advanced analytical framework such as NEMS (EIA) 
or SIEN (OLADE) or LEAP that is then used to analyze the impact of energy policy 
proposals on key economic performance areas.  
The resultant energy information system should also be used to produce energy 
intelligence and reports for dissemination to the various industries and other energy 
stakeholders.  
An Organizational Structure to Move Us Forward 
The collection, compilation, collation and updating of this data; the subsequent analyses 
of the data; the derivation of plans and policy proposals from the results of these 
analyses; and the assessment of the impact of proposed plans and policies on other 
sectors of Belize’s economy require a concerted, focused and consistent effort. In our 
29 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
view, such an effort can best be channeled and managed through a National Energy and 
Electricity Planning Institute (NEEPI). 
TOR of NEEPI 
The NEEPI should be charged with the responsibility for formulating energy plans and 
policies in coordination with relevant stakeholders, for disseminating these plans and 
policies to relevant stakeholders (after the requisite approvals have been gotten), for 
monitoring adherence to these plans and policies through the bodies charged with 
administering them, and for providing information feedback to stakeholders. 
NEEPI Outputs 
The major outputs of the NEEPI should be the following: 
  Policy proposals 
  Energy plans on which the policy proposals are based 
  Annual energy reports, similar to the Annual Energy Outlook produced by the US DOE 
  Quarterly energy reports, following the same format as the annual energy report 
  Aggregate energy statistics by sector 
Relationship with Government and Other Organizations 
The NEEPI should be setup as an autonomous statutory body under the auspices of the 
Ministry of Public Utilities or the Ministry of Natural Resources or a new Ministry of 
Energy. The NEEPI should not directly report to any particular Ministry or other 
Government department. Government exerts its control over the direction of the NEEPI 
through the representatives it appoints on the NEEPI’s board and, more importantly, 
through Government’s stated national priorities and objectives, which the NEEPI should 
be bound to follow.  
Proposed Technical Organizational Structure 
The technical responsibilities of the NEEPI should be assigned to units on the basis of 
area of energy supply or consumption sector: upstream petroleum, agriculture and 
upstream biofuels, transport (which would include downstream petroleum fuels and 
biofuels), renewable electricity, buildings, and industry (including agro-processing). 
Technical responsibilities assigned to each unit may be further re-assigned to sub-units 
within the unit.  
A separate technical planning and policy-formulation unit should be setup to receive the 
results of analyses and recommendations from each of the other units, and to collate 
these results and recommendations into the energy plan and final policy proposals. The 
technical planning unit should be headed by a technical planning committee, made up of 
the heads of each of the other units and technical planning experts. The 
30 
 
“Energy By the People …. For the People” 
 
recommendations of this technical planning committee are then submitted to the Board 
of the NEEPI for their approval, before submission to the Cabinet or appropriate 
Ministry for final ratification and follow-up action. 
31 
 
