 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSAL FOR A NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY 
FOR BELIZE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                              
 
 
 
                                                                       
 
                                                                       
 
                                                                     
 
    
                                                              March, 2011 
                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
THE GOVERNMENT OF BELIZE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PROPOSAL FOR A NATIONAL ENERGY POLICY FOR 
BELIZE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Project sponsored by the  
Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade of Canada 
Conducted by OAS/DSD/Energy and Climate Change Mitigation Section 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
List of Acronyms 
 
BAL                    Belize Aquaculture Limited 
BEL                    Belize Electricity Limited 
BELCOGEN      Belize Co-Generation Energy Limited 
GPD                   Geology and Petroleum Department 
GST                    General Sales Taxes 
ME                      Ministry of Energy 
MCTPU              Ministry of Communications, Transport and Public Utilities 
MNRE                Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment 
 
NEP                    National Energy Policy 
OAS                    Organization of American States 
PUC                     Public Utilities Commission 
RETs                    Renewable Energy Technologies 
SED                     Sustainable Energy Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
Table of Contents:
1. Introduction: Page: 7
2. Outlook on Energy .: Page: 8
3. Objectives and Priorities of the Energy Policy .: Page: 10
4. Part: Page: 1
5. Part: Page: 2
6. Energy Supply Side Objectives and Strategies: Page: 19
8. Other Renewable Energy Resources ..: Page: 23
9. LPG: Page: 25
10. Rural Energy: Page: 25
11. Cross-Cutting Issues, Objectives and Strategies: Page: 27
Table of Contents:
12. Governance and Institutional Capacity ..: Page: 32
 1. Introduction 
This document outlines a proposed National Energy Policy (NEP) for the Government of Belize. A secure 
and  sustainable  energy  supply  is  critical  to  the  nation’s  development.  Energy  services  are  needed  for 
electricity  generation,  water  supply,  agriculture  production,  transportation  and  telecommunications.  All 
these services are integral to the development of Belize. The priority areas, overarching goal and specific 
objectives  for  the  development  of  the  energy  sector  can  be  summarized  as  security  of  supplies, 
environmental protection and competitiveness. This policy document identifies seven key areas needed to 
attain  them,  including  energy  efficiency,  reduction  in  reliance  on  imported  fuels,  stability  in  energy 
supply,  administration  and  dissemination  of  national  energy  data,  measures to  curb  carbon  dioxide  and 
other emissions, efficient and effective delivery of energy and policy support to the energy sector. 
1.1 Why an Energy Policy 
As the country embarks upon a development process and the modernization of the economy, it needs to 
address energy challenges. All modern economies are energy dependent. If economic prosperity is to be 
achieved  and  sustained,  and  living  standards  for  Belizeans  improved,  a  paradigm  shift  in  policy  and 
planning for energy supply and consumption is crucial.  
Belize is abundant in energy resources, particularly biomass (forestry), hydroelectricity, solar and wind. 
Although these resources could play a central role in sustaining development, the nation remains highly 
dependent  on  imported  energy  sources.  Furthermore,  access  to  energy  in  rural  areas  is  inadequate  and 
public awareness regarding energy efficiency is low. 
The  institutional  framework  put  in  place  in  the  mid-1980s  has  not  changed  significantly.  Most  of  the 
institutional deficiencies posing major obstacles in improving the energy sector still exist, particularly the 
absence of one single authority responsible for formulating and coordinating energy sector policy. Energy 
needs  of  people  living  in  rural  areas  remain  unaddressed.  As  a  result  these  populations  rely  largely  on 
biomass. Improving energy access in rural areas would play a pivotal role in poverty reduction. 
As the government embarks on a revision of the nation’s energy policy, it is essential that it understands 
the  importance  of  reliable,  sustainable  and  indigenous  sources  of  energy  in  achieving  the  country’s 
potential  for  development.  The  vulnerability  of  the  economy  in  the  last  decade,  faced  with  insecure 
energy supplies, must be addressed. First of all, a short, medium and long term policy providing guidance 
on how to address energy needs must be adopted. Secondly, legal and institutional frameworks must be 
adapted to favor new investments in sustainable energy supplies that will yield affordable energy services. 
Critical changes in this direction are to improve governance, including enhanced sector management, to 
emphasize service affordability and to widen access, thus covering the rural production sector.      
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
2. Outlook on Energy 
2.1 Global  
1.  Oil  is  the  principal  source  of  energy  in  the  world.  About  87%  of  total  primary  energy 
consumption  comes  from  fossil  fuel  and  about  40%  from  oil.  World  oil  prices  have  been 
increasing in the last decade. In 2007, they nearly doubled those of 2003 in real terms. During the 
2008  oil  crisis  they  reached  US$147  per  barrel  in  mid-July  and,  although  the  crisis  was  short 
lived,  current  prices  in  international  markets  have  toppled  US$100.  Prior  to  2000,  the  average 
spot price per barrel was about US$20. In March 2011, the average spot price was US$103 per 
barrel. According to the Energy Information Administration the forecast of the spot price of oil 
will reach about US$150 per barrel in 2014 and US$200 per barrel by 2025.  
2.  The  2009  edition  of  the  World  Energy  Outlook  projected  that,  by  2030,  total  primary  energy 
demand  will  increase  by  over  50%.  The  demand  for  oil  and  natural  gas  is  attributable  to  the 
increasing  consumption  levels  of  emerging  developing  countries  and  emerging  economies  like 
China  and  India.  It  is  expected  that  global  demand  for  oil  to  grow  by  41%  by  2030.  Such 
increases in demand will drive up oil and gas prices in international markets. 
3.  Since 2005 the members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) have 
not increased their oil production but have increased the oil prices. The cost of oil exploration and 
development, across-the-board increases in commodity prices and a weaker U.S. dollar have all 
served to drive up prices. 
4.  The global challenge is the identification of plausible ways to maintain reasonable energy prices, 
mitigate  the  adverse  effects  of  high  petroleum  prices,  minimize  fossil  fuel  supply  disruptions, 
lower the rate of increases in consumption of fossil fuels and minimize the deleterious effects of 
climate change and greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
2.2 Regional  
5.  The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) is an organization that comprises of 15 full members, 5 
associate  members  and  7  observer  members.  CARICOM  is  comprised  mainly  of  small  island 
developing  states.  Most  of  its  member  states  have  limited  natural  resources,  small  populations, 
small economies, but widely different energy realities, including Belize.  
6.  The  fifteen  CARICOM  states  are  almost  entirely  dependent  on  imported  oil  and  gas.  It  is 
estimated  that  up  to  95% of  commercial  energy  consumed  in  the  CARICOM  region  is  derived 
from fossil fuels, primarily oil. That figure represents about 90 million barrels of oil equivalent in 
a year.  
7.  CARICOM  countries  are  essentially  net  importers  of  crude  oil  and  refined  products  with  the 
exception  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  Belize  —largely  because  of  extra-
regional  sources.  Specifically,  CARICOM  member  states  source  petroleum  products  from 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  (PETROTRIN),  Curação  (PDVSA),  Puerto  Rico  (Shell),  St.  Croix 
(Hovensa) and through the Energy Cooperation Agreement PETROCARIBE with Venezuela.  
8.  CARICOM  member  states  experience  the  strong  negative  economic  effects  stemming  from 
increasing international demand for petroleum and rising petroleum prices. In order to counteract 
said  effects,  CARICOM  established  the  Petroleum  Stabilization  Fund  in  2004,  and  in  2005 
certain member states signed the Energy Cooperation Agreement PETROCARIBE.  
9.  Within the PETROCARIBE energy cooperation agreement, provisions have been made to allow 
member countries to purchase oil on preferential financing terms. The price of the world markets 
has  grown,  and  so  has  the  value  of  PETROCARIBE  loans  to  importing  countries. 
PETROCARIBE has become the single largest source of concessionary finance to the Caribbean 
Region.  PETROCARIBE  credits  to  importing  countries  from  June  2005  to  December  2007 
amounted to $1.17 billion, and are expected to reach $4.5 billion by 2015. 
10.  In  2010,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  Lima  Agreement,  Belize  was  accepted  as  a 
member  of  the  Latin  American  Energy  Organization  (OLADE).  OLADE  provides  technical 
support to help improve energy security and, advises and promotes cooperation and coordination 
among its member countries. 
11.  The Central American Integration System (SICA) has the potential to support some of the energy 
challenges of Belize and to be the ramp for the implementation of regional agreements. 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
3. Objectives and Priorities of the Energy Policy 
A  secure,  competitively  priced,  and  environmentally  sound  energy  supply  is  a  basic  requirement  for  a 
competitive economy. Without an energy supply with these characteristics, sustained economic growth, 
employment  and  prosperity  are  at  risk.  These  components  are  all  essential,  though  their  relative 
importance differs. In certain instances, they are clearly complementary, while in others they appear to be 
mutually competitive. 
Policy  decisions  sometimes  involve  tradeoffs  between  one  objective  and  another.  For  example, 
improvement in energy efficiency will address all objectives of the energy policy. Similarly, investment 
in  renewable  energy  sources  will  address  environmental  protection  and  security  of  supply  (though  not 
necessarily competitive pricing).  
The importance of security of supply can be realized by considering the cost of energy not being available 
when required by an end-user. Interruption of the energy supply, or threats of interruption, could lead to 
widespread disruption. Better security can be achieved by ensuring that energy sources are reliable, that 
markets are designed and regulated appropriately, and that energy systems are resilient to shocks through 
a combination of diversity and flexibility. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
4. Part 1- Main Policy Goal, Vision and Broad Objectives  
The  main  goal  of  the  energy  sector  is:  To  meet  the  energy  needs  of  the  people  though 
energy efficiency, production, procurement, transportation, distribution and end-user systems 
in order to contribute to social and economic development in an environmentally sustainable 
manner.  
 
A Vision for Belize’s future energy independence:  We define energy independence as the 
ability  to  meet  its  vital  energy  needs  with  reliable,  affordable  and  renewable  energy 
resources.  This  requires  the  pursuit  of  a  balanced  and  advantageous  transition  toward 
control of our energy future, built upon a solid and ever growing foundation of our own free, 
abundant, clean, and renewable energy resources —the wind, the sun and the water. 
 
4.1. Broad Objectives  
The following broad objectives should be addressed in the energy policy:  
Objective  1  –  To  ascertain  the  availability,  potential  and  demand  of  the  various  energy 
resources in the country 
To meet this objective, Government shall:  
 
A.  Create  an  Energy  Unit  with  appropriate  technical  staff  offering  energy  audits  and  capacity 
building. 
B.  Build a database on all the available energy resources and energy consumption patterns. This will 
enable  the  government  to  match  supply  to  demand  over  the  long  term  and  also  provide 
information on potential projects for investment. 
C.  Build  the  necessary  local  capacity  to  acquire  the  required  data  and  assess  and  evaluate  the 
resources.  
 
Objective  2  –  To  increase  access  to  modern,  affordable  and  reliable  energy  services  in 
order to contribute to poverty eradication  
To achieve this objective the Government shall:  
 
A.  Encourage private sector investment and management in the energy sector. 
B.  Promote competition between energy service providers. 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
C.  Promote the development of markets in energy technologies and services. 
D.  Create an enabling environment to markedly improve rural energy supply and access by:  
(a)  applying subsidies for certain types of capital investments;  
(b)  applying differential tariffs to different areas and projects; and 
(c)  organizing rural communities for better provision of services. 
E.  Provide education and technical advice and information on energy conservation. 
F.  Encourage  local  financial  institutions  to  establish  sustainable  financing  mechanisms  for  energy 
programs.  
G.  Intervene through transparent, regulatory and other carefully defined and timed mechanisms, to 
ensure effective delivery of energy services to consumers where market failures are identified.  
Objective 3 – To improve governance of the energy sector by defining the relative roles 
and functions of the various governance institutions, thus making the operation of these 
institutions  more  accountable  and 
transparent,  and 
their  membership  more 
representatives,  and  to  strengthen  government  capacity  to  better  formulate  and 
implement energy policies.  
To achieve the above objective Government shall:  
 
A.  Create a Ministry of Energy and define the roles and functions of the various institutions involved 
in the energy sector, increasing the role of the private sector, NGO’s and communities.  
B.  Create a transparent legal and regulatory framework for the sector. 
C.  Build  capacity  at  the  national  and  local  levels  for  better  formulation  and  implementation  of 
energy policies and programs.  
D.  Build the capacity of regulatory agencies to provide even-handed and predictable regulation.  
E.  Improve  the  coordination  between  government  departments  for  effective  implementation  of 
government policies. 
F.  Consult  stakeholders  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  new  energy  policies  in  order  to 
ensure that policies take into consideration the views of a wider range of stakeholders. 
 
Objective  4  –  To stimulate  economic  development,  Government  will  ensure  that  energy 
plays a central role in the economic development of Belize and the sub-region. 
 To achieve this, the Government shall:  
 
A.  Promote  energy  trade  within  the  region  to  encourage  competition  within  the  energy  markets  to 
achieve efficiency. 
B.  Attract investments in energy services by providing appropriate incentives. 
C.  Ensure energy supply security and reliability. 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
 
Objective  5  – To manage energy related environmental impacts. Government will ensure 
that  environmental  considerations  are  given  priority  by  energy  suppliers  and  users  to 
protect the environment and put in place a monitoring mechanism to evaluate compliance 
with established environmental protection guidelines.  
To meet the above objective, Government shall:  
 
A.  Promote  the  use  of  alternative  sources  of  energy  and  technologies  which  are  environmentally 
friendly. 
B.  Sensitize energy suppliers and users about the environmental issues associated with energy. 
C.  Work  toward  the  establishment  and  acceptance  of  broad  targets  for  the  reduction  of  energy-
related emissions that are harmful to the environment and energy users.  
D.  Promote efficient utilization of indigenous energy resources. 
E.  Strengthen the environment-monitoring unit in the Ministry dealing with the environment.  
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
5.  Part 2 - Energy Policy Statements  
5.1 Regulation Principles for the Energy Sector  
Due to the liberalization of Belize’s economy it is essential that decisions pertaining to the energy sector 
ensure  appropriate  energy  supply  and  use.  An  efficient  and  sustainable  energy  sector  needs  open  and 
competitive  markets  that  will  result  in  efficient  resources  allocation.  Currently,  energy  prices  may  not 
accurately  reflect  the  full  social  cost  and  energy  suppliers  may  not  choose  the  most  efficient  options. 
Government  intervention may  be  warranted  in  such instances.    With  a  current  monopoly  in  the  energy 
sectors, especially the power sub-sector, legislative and regulatory gaps resulting in unfair practices by the 
players. This calls for government intervention to ensure fair play, protect consumers, ensure the financial 
viability of private investments, promote competition and collect information.  
5.2 Energy Demand Side Objectives and Strategies 
5.2.1 Household Sector   
Unemployment  in  Belize is  high (14%) and a  large percentage  of households  are poor.  In  these  poorer 
households, the main source of energy is fuel wood and charcoal. Kerosene lamps and candles are used 
mainly  for  lighting.  These  sources  of  energy  militate  against  the  efficient  and  rational  use  of  energy. 
Furthermore,  low-income  households  tend  to  purchase  cheap,  inefficient,  unsafe  appliances,  thus 
increasing the risk to their health and other hazards. The numerous problems associated with inefficient 
appliances  would  require  a  combination  of  policies  that  would  tackle  efficiency  of  energy  use,  energy 
conservation  and  a  change  to  more  energy  efficient  appliances.  In  rural  areas,  there  is  a  need  to  have 
access to electricity especially for communal facilities where RETs are the most reliable option.  
1.  Objective:  To  provide  affordable  energy  services  for  households  and  community-based  services 
including water supply and sanitation, health, education, public lighting and communication in order to 
improve the social welfare of the rural population.  
Policy Statements  
A.  The  government  shall  encourage  the  use  of  efficient  end-use  technologies  and 
good household practices.  
B.  Alternative  sources  of  energy  for  cooking,  heating,  cooling,  lighting  and  other 
applications will be encouraged.  
C.  The safety of household energy appliances will be ensured through regulation of 
safety standards.  
D.  The  government  shall  lend  support  to  schemes  that  support  the  provision  of 
electricity services to communal facilities in rural areas.  
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
2. Strategies  
 
A.  A comprehensive Household Energy Plan, which adequately addresses issues related to shortages 
and inefficient use of biomass and affordability of modern energy services, will be developed.  
B.  The adoption of energy demand side management in middle and high-income households and the 
implementation  of  energy  conservation  measures  in  institutional  buildings  and  in  government 
departments will be emphasized. 
C.  Incentives  will  be  created  to  make  electricity  and  other  modern  fuels  more  easily  accessible  in 
rural areas.  
5.2.2 Industrial Sector  
Lack of expertise in industry has been identified as one of the key barriers to increased energy efficiency. 
Most  industries  in  Belize  consume  large  quantities  of  electricity  inefficiently.  Implementing  energy 
efficiency programs will reduce consumption and operating expenses.  
Objective:  To  address  the  power  needs  of  the  industrial  sector  and  to  introduce  energy  efficiency 
measures in industry which will result in an overall financial and environmental benefit that will make the 
industry more competitive.  
Policy Statements  
A.  Government  will  ensure  that  energy  supply  is  adequate  in  order  to  meet  energy 
demand of the industry.  
B.  Energy  audits  will  be  made  mandatory  and  energy  efficiency  and  conservation 
measures will be regulated.  
C.  Government will promote the performance of audits, demonstrations, information 
dissemination, sectoral analyses and training programs.  
Strategies  
A.  Training  and  other  incentives  will  be  provided  to  industries  in  order  for  them  to  adopt  more 
efficient energy end-use technologies.  
B.  Environmental performance auditing will be enforced  
C.  Coordination between institutions concerned with energy, industry and environmental issues will 
be improved.  
D.  Financial incentives  will  be  provided for  energy  efficiency  (e.g.,  the introduction  of  ―time-use‖ 
electricity tariffs). 
E.  Government will promote energy efficiency awareness amongst industrial energy consumers, and 
will encourage the use of energy-efficient practices by this sector.  
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
5.2.3 Commercial Sector  
The commercial sector includes, among others, wholesale and retail shops, hospitals, hotels, restaurants 
and  recreation  centers.  Overall,  the  demand  for  energy  in  the  sector  is  mainly  met  by  commercial 
electricity and petroleum.  
Policy Statements  
 
A.  Government  will  ensure  sufficient  and  cost-effective  energy  supply  to  meet  the 
increasing demand in the commercial sector. 
B.  Energy management practices will be promoted and regulated as necessary. 
C.  The efficient use of alternative energy sources will be encouraged. 
 
5.2.4 Mining Sector  
Demand is met through self-generation and, in fewer cases, through the grid. Mining companies will be 
encouraged  to  generate  their  own  electricity  and  cooperate  in  the  development  of  power  infrastructure. 
Mining companies will be encouraged to develop surplus power from self-generation, which will be sold 
to neighboring communities.   
Policy Statements 
 
A.  Mining  companies  will  be  encouraged  to  generate  their  own  electricity  and  to 
diversify their generation and distribution energy mix.  
B.  Mining companies will be encouraged to provide and, when possible, sell power to 
communities in the environs of their mining areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
5.2.5 Transport  
The  transport  sector  is  a  major  user  of  petroleum  products.  Although  road  transportation  is  dominant, 
various  forms  of  transportation  play  vital  roles  in  the  lives  of  rural  populace.  Some  regulations  are  in 
place, albeit inefficient practices abound the sector.  
Objective: To promote optimum, efficient and environmentally conscious utilization of petroleum fuels 
and substitution.  
 
 
Policy Statements  
 
A.  Government will promote energy efficiency and conservation in the transport sector. 
B.  Use of more efficient transportation modes shall be encouraged. 
 
Strategies:  
A.  Government  will  formulate  fiscal  and  transport  policies  to  promote  energy  conservation  and 
efficiency. 
B.  The  feasibility  of  introducing  measures  for  pollution  control  will  be  explored,  including  using 
environmentally friendly fossil fuels such as unleaded gasoline, low sulfur diesel and importation 
of more efficient vehicles. 
C.  Incentives  will  be  provided  to  promote  mass  transport  systems  so  that  the  proliferation  of 
individual vehicles is reduced. 
D.  The development of sub-sectors concerned with other forms of transportation will be encouraged. 
 
5.2.6 Agriculture Sector  
The current agricultural policy calls for increased output and efficiency in agricultural production, timely 
delivery and efficient use of energy inputs into agriculture and increased use of tractors. The main energy 
challenge within the agriculture sector is ensuring the supply of sufficient and cost-effective energy that 
meets  the  requirements  for  improved  agricultural  activities,  including  agro-processing  and  irrigation. 
There  is  a  need  to  create  a  commercial  environment  and  encourage  entrepreneurs  to  develop  and 
distribute energy products and technologies in order to improve efficiency in agricultural production and 
add value to agricultural products. Furthermore, methods and approaches on how to maximize the use of 
alternative  sources  of  energy  such  as  micro-scale  hydro,  solar,  wind,  biomass,  and  other  renewable 
energies must be developed and commercialized. 
Objective:  To  increase  the  use  of  modern  energy  in  agriculture,  thus  increasing  in  agricultural 
production, leading to the achievement of the country’s food security objectives.   
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
 
Policy Statements  
A.  Government shall ensure sufficient energy supply to meet the increasing demand 
in the agriculture sector.  
B.  Energy efficiency measures will be encouraged in irrigation, agro-processing and 
other agricultural activities.  
C.  Agro-processing  centers  will  be  facilitated  with  appropriate  energy  alternatives, 
with  emphasis  on  electrification  in  order  to  promote  small-scale  industry, 
employment creation and economic growth. 
D.  Governmental  institutions  and  private  sector  related  directly  and  indirectly  with 
the  energy  sector  will  encourage  research  and  development  to  introduce 
appropriate energy efficiency technologies for agriculture activities.  
Strategies 
A.  Farmers will be encouraged to implement modest mechanization that focuses on providing access 
to energy services, which helps to raise the productivity of labor-intensive agriculture. 
B.  Capacity  building,  information  and  awareness  campaigns  will  be  undertaken  and  facilities  to 
finance energy services for rural agro-processing will be provided. 
C.  Measures should be taken to ensure that petroleum products are readily available in rural areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
6.  Energy Supply Side Objectives and Strategies  
6.1 Electricity  
Access  to  electricity  is  reduced  in  rural  areas.  The  power  sector  reform  is  aimed  at  improving  the 
performance  of  the  sector  and  increasing  access  to  electricity  nationwide  at  a  reasonable  cost  by  using 
RETs. Policy measures should aim at creating conditions that could attract private sector capital into the 
sector.  
Objective  
To  increase  access  to  safe,  reliable  and  efficient  power  supply  for  Belizeans  and  to  meet  national, 
economic and social development needs.  
Policy Statements  
 
A.  The  entry  of  multiple  players  into  the  generation  market  will  be  encouraged. 
Generation of electric power shall be fully open to private and public investors as 
Independent Power Producers.  
B.  Regional  cooperation  and  integration  shall  be  given  strong  consideration  in 
investment matters in order to exploit low cost energy sources for regional trade. 
In  the  mid-term  the  Public  Utilities  Commission  will  be  open  to  strategic 
partnerships  with  technically  suitable,  and  financially  strong,  investors  in  the 
region,  as  a  step  in  the  development  of  a  strategy  to  improve  relationships  and 
create partnerships with foreign countries to import cheap electricity. 
 

C.  Government is committed to extending transmission lines where feasible and will 
promote the use of RETs where it is not. 
a.  Introduce  a  new  national  grid  to  other  parts  of  the  country.  Extensions 
from this grid will be made on a rational and economic basis. 
 
b.   Government is committed to setting up a rural electricity fund.  
 
D.  Government will take legislative steps to criminalize electricity theft to serve as a 
deterrent to the significant amount of people abstracting electricity illegally.  
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
Strategies  
A.  Increase  competition  in  the  sector  through  open  participation  of  IPPs,  operate  and  expand  the 
existing distribution system at minimum cost and negotiate the price of electricity to reflect the 
marginal cost of supply in order to achieve efficiency.  
B.  Create  incentives  to  attract  private  sector  investment  and  regional  interconnection;  including, 
appropriate access to loans on concessionary terms, financial instruments, government guarantees 
and ―smart subsidies‖ (or grants) for infrastructure investment.  
C.  Establish  a  regulatory  governmental  body  for  regulation  and  implement  a  rural  electrification 
strategy and plan along the following lines:  
a.  Progressive development of rural electrification schemes on a demand driven basis whereby 
capable sponsors can initiate and develop electrification projects. 
b.  Creation and capacity building of a Rural Electrification Agency. 
c.  Establishment  of  a  Rural  Electrification  Committee  to  attract  grants  and  loans  for  rural 
electrification schemes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
7 Oil and Gas Exploration and Production 
7.1 Petroleum Exploration and Production  
The sector is in its formative years and there is room for further exploratory work and investment. There 
is great need to improve resources and enhance technical capacity for sustainable oil production.  
Objective: To tap the real petroleum potential and to promote its exploitation adequately and sustainably.   
Policy Statements  
A.  Petroleum  exploration  will  be  promoted  in  accordance  with  best  international 
industry practices. 
B.  Regional  and 
international  cooperation  will  be  encouraged 
in  exploration, 
development of infrastructure, trade, and database and capacity building. 
C.  Major oil companies will be encouraged to invest in exploration. 
 
General Strategies: 
A.  Create conducive conditions for attracting more investors into the sector. 
B.  Develop a mitigation plan to reduce environmental hazards in all oil operations. 
C.  Facilitate the acquisition of geological and geophysical data for assessing the petroleum potential. 
D.  Build  technical  capacity  and  improve  the  efficiency  of  the  GPD  to  monitor  and  regulate 
petroleum exploration and development. 
7.1.1 Petroleum Marketing and Sales  
Difficulties with supply, storage, importation and availability of foreign exchange need to be addressed as 
they  have  a  major  impact  on  the  economy.  Also  of  concern  is  the  distribution  network,  which  makes 
petroleum products considerably more expensive in distant rural areas.  
Objective  
To ensure an adequate, reliable and affordable supply of quality petroleum products for all sectors of the 
economy  at  internationally  competitive  and  fair  prices  and  with  appropriate  health,  safety  and 
environmental standards.  
Policy Statements  
A.  International standards and codes of practice will be adopted and adapted within 
the industry. 
B.  Government  will  keep  appropriate  levels  of  strategic  stocks  based  on  an 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
assessment of the risk of supply disruption.  
C.  Petroleum  companies  will  be  encouraged  to  extend  their  marketing  networks  to 
smaller towns  in various parts of the country. It is envisaged that all towns with 
populations  of  more  than  5,000  will  be  supplied  with  fuel  directly  from  the 
marketing companies, irrespective of location.  
D.  Government will lend its support to schemes to pool resources for the procurement 
of large stocks of petroleum products to result in cost reductions. 
E.  Government will commission a study to assess the economic viability of building 
and operating a refinery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
8. Other Renewable Energy Resources 
Despite abundant renewable energy resources, rural areas are still lacking access to electricity. Proactive 
measures should be taken by government to address problems that prevent the effective utilization of the 
indigenous energy sources. 
Objective:  To  develop  the  use  of  renewable  energy  sources  for  both  small  and  large-scale 
applications.  
Policies  
A.  Appropriate  financial  and  administrative  institutions  will  be  set  up  to  manage 
RETs.  Appropriate  norms,  codes  of  practice,  guidelines  and  standards  for  RETs 
will  be  instituted,  thus  creating  an  enabling  environment  for  its  sustainable 
development.  
B.  Biomass  conversion  and  end-use  technologies  will  be  promoted  in  order  to  save 
resources,  reduce  deforestation  rates  and  land  degradation,  and  minimize  the 
threat of climate change. 
C.  Environmental  considerations  will  be  included  in  all  renewable  energy  planning 
and implementation.  
D.  Cooperation with relevant stakeholders will be enhanced. 
E.  Research and development in RETs will be supported. 
F.  A central body will be set up to regulate the RETs industry.  
G.  Government  will  legislate  the  registering  of  associations  and  organizations 
involved with fuel wood, charcoal and improved stoves. 
H.  Government  will  consider  the  reduction  of  taxes  by  giving  waivers  for  the 
importation of RETs equipment.  
I.  Agro-based industries will be encouraged to produce electricity from waste.  
J.  Manufacturing  of  RETs  equipment  will  be  actively  pursued  by  encouraging  its 
promotion and providing the necessary investments.  
Strategies:  
 
A.  Support  the  dissemination  of  biomass  and  other  RETs  to  increase  their  positive  impact  on  the 
energy balance and the environment 
B.  Facilitate  adequate  financing  schemes  for  RETs  by  establishing  sustainable  financing 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
mechanisms to make them more accessible  
C.  Ensure  that  RETs  producers  and  importers  ascribe  to  certified  performance  and  technical 
standards  
D.  Include  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency  in  the  curricula  of  schools,  Universities, 
vocational training centers and other institutions of education  
E.  Support  efforts  to  develop  biomass  resources  in  agreement  with  the  national  Forestry  policy 
Promote Agro-forestry enterprises – including fruit trees and mechanization  
F.  Encourage  solar  water  heating  in  Hospitals,  clinics,  boarding  homes,  etc.  for    sterilization  and 
hygiene purposes 
G.  Take  measures  to  allay  fears  of  using  solar  cookers  in  rural  areas  because  of  cultural  and 
traditional practices 
H.  Co-operatives should be encouraged to facilitate the financing mechanism for RETs (e.g. reduce 
RETs importations of taxation).  
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
9.  LPG 
LPG is a mid-term solution as a source of energy in rural areas.  
Objective: To develop the use of LPG for small scale applications.  
 
Policies 
Government  will  actively  encourage  the  use  of  LPG  in  urban  areas.  To  this  end 
Government will put in strategies and provide the necessary incentives to make the use of 
LPG more persistent.  
10. Rural Energy  
Economic  activities  in  rural  areas  are  greatly  influenced  by  energy.  All  aspects  of  rural  economics, 
including  agriculture,  business,  social  services,  poverty,  and  gender  equality  are  influenced  by  energy 
services.  Fuelwood  is  the  main  source  of  energy  for  most  households,  and  access  to  sustainable  and 
secure  fuelwood  supplies  and  RETs  is  important  for  rural  communities’  survival.  Inadequate  access  to 
modern, reliable energy services is hampering economic growth and impeding agricultural mechanization 
and industrialization. A sustainable institutional framework that can cope with  energy diversity is a key 
factor for successful development of rural energy. There is a need to establish an institutional framework 
that can mobilize, coordinate and facilitate private and public initiatives for rural energy. 
Many of the measures to be taken have been addressed in specific energy sub-sectors. Those that have a 
significant bearing on rural energy supply are mentioned below.     
Objective: 
To  improve  the  traditional  methods  to  supply  energy  in  rural  areas  and  to  improve  the  supply  of 
commercial energy services to contribute meaningfully to the social and economic development of rural 
areas.   
Policy Statements 
A.  A  rural  electrification  strategy  and  plan  shall  be  instituted  along  the  following 
lines:  
a.  Progressive  development  of  rural  electrification  schemes  on  a  demand  basis 
whereby capable sponsors can initiate and develop electrification projects. 
B.  Government  will  set  up  a  Rural  Electrification  Fund 
to  support  rural 
electrification. The fund, to be set up and administered within the future Ministry 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
of Energy, will consist of the following contributions:  
a.  A levy of part of the electricity bills paid to the national utility-this requirement 
to  include  a  rural  electrification  levy  as  part  of  the  utility  bills  will  be 
legislated. 
b.  Funds provided by the government specifically for rural electrification. 
c.  Funds  provided  by  donors  and  other  agencies  specifically  for  rural 
electrification. 
 
C.  Government will support research and development for rural energy. 
D.  The  application  of  alternative  energy  sources  other  than  fuelwood  and 
charcoal will be promoted in order to reduce indoor health hazards. 
E.  Entrepreneurship and private initiative in the production and marketing of 
products and services for rural and renewable energy will be promoted. 
F.  Government  will  ensure  continued  electrification  of  rural  economic  centers  and 
make electricity accessible and affordable to low income customers. 
G.  There  will  be  a  conscious  effort  to  facilitate  increased  availability  of  energy 
services, including grid and non-grid electrification, to rural areas. 
H.  Norms, codes of practice, standards and guidelines for cost-effective rural energy 
supplies will be established. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
11. Cross-Cutting Issues, Objectives and Strategies  
11.1 Energy Planning  
There  is  no  central  planning  unit  that  oversees  the  energy  sector,  which  results  in  poor  sub  sector 
coordination. To satisfy future energy needs it is necessary analyze the energy sector in terms of how it is 
fulfillment will contribute toward attaining national economic and social goals.  
Policy statements  
A.  Government will establish appropriate structures and systems  such as an energy 
unit to carry out energy planning functions within the Ministry of Energy.  
B.  The  Energy  Unit  will  consist  of  planners  knowledgeable  in  all  the  energy  sub-
sectors, who will liaise with ministries and agencies.  
C.  The  future  Ministry  of  Energy  will  support  the  strengthening  of  sub-sectoral 
planning and information gathering units. 
Strategies:  
 
A.  The  Government  is  committed  to  setting  up  an  Energy  Desk  within  the  office  of  the  Prime 
Minister and tasks it with developing and fulfilling all the details of the National Energy Policy 
prior to setting up the Energy Unit.  
 
11.2 Energy Information Systems and Dissemination  
Energy  information  systems  are  policy  implementation  tools.  Energy  information  collection,  storage, 
analysis and exchange are vital for planning, policy formulation and decision-making.  
In Belize information systems are lacking, which  results in poor information exchange amongst energy 
stakeholders.    Capacity  to  manage  and  analyze  energy  information  is  inadequate.  There  is  a  need  to 
establish  an  adequate  energy  information  system  that  will  serve  to  mobilize  human  resources,  raise 
awareness and disseminate information to stakeholders for effective policy implementation.  
The Energy Desk within the Office of the Prime Minister will have the lead responsibility to delineate 
the responsibilities of the future ―Energy Unit‖. The Prime Minister’s office will take the lead in the 
implementation  of  this  policy.  Opportunities  exist  to  integrate  energy  information  into  current 
communication and education programs run by other organizations. Ministries, NGOs, the private sector 
and academia, can all play a role in communication and education. The prospective Ministry of Energy 
should  monitor  the  development  of  energy  awareness  programs  and  regularly  assess  communication 
strategies.  
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
Policy Statement  
A proper information and communication system will be established and strengthened 
in  the  energy  sector,  and  human  resources  mobilized  to  undertake  sensitization, 
advocacy and dissemination of information to stakeholders.  
11.3 Energy Efficiency and Conservation  
There  is  a  need  for  Government  to  play  a  role  in  facilitating  increased  efficiency  in  the  use  of 
energy. Barriers to the adoption of efficiency measures include:   
  Lack of awareness, information and skills;  
  Lack of access to efficient technologies;  
  High cost of capital.   
 
Policy Statements  
A.  Government  commits  itself  to  the  promotion  of  energy  efficiency  and  the 
development of holistic programs for households, industry and commerce. 
B.  Energy  audits  in  industries  will  be  ensured  by  means  of  a  new  national  energy 
information system. 
 
11.4 Energy and Environment  
The effects of energy consumption on the environment need to be considered in all sectors. All stages of 
energy resources —fossil or non-fossil— exploitation, production, conversion, transport, storage and end-
use  can  have  negative  impacts  on  the  environment.  Health,  safety  and  environmental  consequences  of 
energy production and utilization must be addressed.  
 
Policy Statements  
A.  Environmental Impact Assessments will be required for all energy projects. 
B.  Energy efficiency and conservation measures will serve as a means to curb 
emissions. 
C.   The development of alternative energy sources, including renewable energy and 
wood fuel end-use, and efficient technologies to protect woodlands will be 
promoted.  
D.  Programs  for  disaster  prevention  and  standards  for  exploration,  production, 
conversion, transport, distribution, storage, and consumption will be promoted. 
E.  Government  will  monitor  international  developments  and  will  participate  in 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
global  climate  change  negotiations,  and  will  strive  to  balance  its  environmental 
responsibilities and economic interests.  
11.5 Research and Development  
Research and Development (R&D) efforts that give rise to technological innovations in the energy sector 
are  important  as  they  can  lead  to  development  and  economic  growth.  R&D  issues  relating  to  biomass, 
rural energy, energy end-use, affordability, and pricing mechanisms  must be the focus of attention. The 
challenge is to overcome the inadequate financial resources and lack of skilled manpower for R&D. There 
is also  a lack of understanding of critical energy R&D issues.  Institutional coordination  with respect to 
various  ongoing  research  activities  in  the  sector  are  lacking.  Cooperation  between  public  and  private 
sectors in R&D of energy issues such as demand and supply management, pricing, conservation and rural 
energy need to be encouraged and coordinated. There is also a need to support regional and international 
cooperation in R&D on technological and non-technological advancement.  
Policy Statement  
A.  Regional and international cooperation on Research and Development in the field 
of innovative, environmentally sound energy technologies will be fostered. 
11.6 Capacity Building and Capacity Development  
Education is vital to improve the development in any country. Most Belizeans are unaware of energy use 
practices and options. Renewable energy and energy efficiency must be showcased in schools, vocational 
training  centers,  colleges  and  other  learning  institutions.  There  is  also  a  need  for  mass  educational  and 
promotional  efforts  on  energy  issues  targeting  the  public.  There  is  a  lack  of  trained  and  skilled  energy 
experts in the sector, particularly women. In addition, there are inadequate incentives to attract and retain 
qualified energy experts in the sector. The present situation is also constrained by cultural and traditional 
influences, which inhibit gender-balanced training.   
 
Policy Statements  
A.  Energy  education  will  be  encouraged  in  school  curricula,  vocational  training 
centers, colleges and other relevant learning institutions; emphasis will be put on 
practical aspects including physical demonstration, installations and operation.  
B.  Local and foreign investors will be encouraged to provide training on basic skills 
pertaining to energy. 
C.  Government will allocate funding and staffing to undertake and support capacity 
building, education and information dissemination programs.  
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
11.7 International and Regional Energy Trade and Cooperation  
Cooperation  between  neighboring  countries  in  the  Caribbean  and  Central  America  is  vital  for 
development  and  economic  growth.  Belize  is  a  member  of  various  regional  and  international 
organizations, including CARICOM, DR-CAFTA, PETROCARIBE, OLADE, OAS, UN, etc. In addition 
the European Union has many funded several activities in Belize. 
Potential  benefits  derived  from  regional  and  international  energy  trade  and  cooperation  must  be 
maximized.  Belize  must  deepen  its ties  with  other  countries in the  region. Joint  development  of  shared 
energy resources must be encouraged as a means to enhance cooperation and energy security.  
Policy Statements  
A.  Government will encourage collaboration within the Central American countries 
in the area of energy emphasizing future interconnections. 
B.  Government  will  facilitate  international  collaboration  in  research  and  exchange 
of information. Government will facilitate regional cooperation, including energy 
trade,  information  exchange,  capacity  building  and  the  training  of  energy 
specialists. 
11.8 Fiscal and Pricing Issues  
Fiscal policies have a direct effect on energy prices, thus affecting structural demand for energy products. 
The selective use of fiscal mechanisms can be very effective for achieving energy policy objectives, such 
as encouraging fuel switching, rising dedicated sources of finance for particular needs and encouraging 
more  efficient  environmental  and  resource  management.  On  the  other  hand,  unfettered  use  of  fiscal 
mechanisms can lead to unintended consequences. It is therefore essential that fiscal policies  be in line 
with energy policies, particularly as competition increases between energy service providers.  
Policy statements  
A.  Government may use selective fiscal mechanisms in promoting the use of certain 
types  of  fuels  with  the  intention  of  satisfying  future  energy  needs.  This  will 
however  be  done  within  a  limited  timeframe  to  avoid  introducing  structural 
distortions into the market.  
B.  Government  may  consider  the  use  of  selective  fiscal  mechanisms  in  order  to 
increase access to energy services, especially to the poor, and also to enable the 
effective dissemination of some RETs into the market.  
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
11.9   Energy Investment  
Domestic  and  international  investors  must  be  made  aware  of  the  potential  for  investment  within  the 
energy  sector.  Public  and  private  sector  should  be  encouraged  to  invest  in  the  provision  of  energy 
services.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  need  to  facilitate  and  encourage  investment  in  the  development  of 
alternative sources of energy, putting emphasis on the utilization of indigenous resources.  
 
Policy Statements  
A.  Private initiatives will be promoted, and local and foreign investors made aware 
of the potential within the energy sector. 
B.  Government  will  ensure 
that  a 
transparent  and  predictable 
institutional 
framework  that  includes  incentives  is  in  place  to  provide  for  an  enabling 
environment for investment in the energy sector.  
11.10 Gender Issues  
Gender issues in the energy sector need to focus on energy needs and resource ownership from both the 
demand and supply of energy. On the demand side, men and women have different energy  needs given 
their different socio-cultural and traditional roles. On the supply side, women are underrepresented at all 
levels of energy generation, transmission and distribution. There is a gender imbalance at various levels 
of planning and decision-making. On the demand side, especially in rural areas, there is a need to alleviate 
women’s task of searching for energy, especially wood-fuel. Women should be encouraged to participate 
in energy related education, training, programs and projects, planning and decision-making.  
Policy Statements  
A.  Gender equality within the energy sub-sectors both on the demand and supply side 
will be promoted. 
B.  Education and training for women in all aspects of energy will be facilitated.  
C.  Government  will  promote  awareness  on  gender  issues  concerning  social  roles 
with respect to energy, including training on technologies. 
D.  Government will promote gender awareness and advocacy in the energy sector. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
12. Governance and Institutional Capacity 
Governance is the complex set of processes and control relationships that occurs between various players. 
In the energy sector of Belize, these players include parliament, cabinet, ministries dealing with energy 
and power issues, the Minister of Public Utilities, the Minister of Natural Resources and the Environment, 
the  PUC, various government departments at  the  national, provincial and local levels, energy suppliers, 
energy  consumers,  the  regulator,  other  stakeholders  (including  organized  labor,  civic  organizations, 
NGOs,  researchers,  consultants,  financiers,  contractors,  equipment  manufacturers  and  marketers),  and 
foreign donor agencies and organizations. The range of players and the complexity of their relationships 
make energy sector governance difficult to understand in Belize. 
Further, Belize’s energy portfolio falls under various ministries. The centralization of the administration 
of energy is vital to ensure responsible management of the sector and improve governance.  
Objective  
A.  To  institute  a  new  governance  structure  for  the  energy  sector  that  will  meet  the  challenge  of 
developing a consistent energy governance framework which addresses in an integrated manner 
the key issues that will guide policy formulation and implementation.  In this respect the energy 
governance objectives seek to:  
a.  Increase the understanding and role of all Governmental institutions related with the 
Energy sector with the implementation of the National Energy Policy.   
 
b.  Implement energy policy and, in so doing, achieve the economic, social, political goals.  
 
Policy Statements  
A.  As a first step, the creation of an Energy Desk under the Prime Minister’s Office 
will help support the implementation of the NEP. 
B.  Government commits to appoint a Minister of Energy who will be responsible for 
the governance of the energy sector, including the integration of long term energy 
policies, communication with relevant stakeholders, management of regional and 
international  cooperation  and  ensuring 
that  appropriate 
institutions  are 
established  to  achieve  energy  policy  objectives.  The  Minister  will  also  be 
responsible for overall coordination and energy planning.  
C.  Government  is  committed  to  set  up  an  independent  National  Energy  Unit  in  the 
medium term that will be responsible of technical support for all energy planning, 
coordination and regulation. The Energy Unit will function as  an observer, data 
gatherer  and  analysis  body  of  the  energy  sector  at  the  national  level  in  order  to 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
assist  the  Ministry  of  Energy  and  other  national  authorities  in  the  reasonable 
implementation  and  monitoring  of  energy  related  policies  and  laws.  The  Energy 
Unit  will  provide  advice  on  energy  issues  and  activities  inter  alia,  creating  a 
discussion  forum  among  governmental  institutions,  the  private  sector  and  public 
stakeholders. It will have the primary responsibility of updating and improving the 
National  Energy  Policy  and  the  Sustainable  Energy  Action  Plan,  so  that  the 
overall objectives of the energy sector are achieved in the shortest possible time. 
D.  Cabinet will assist with the coordination and implementation of energy policy and 
ensure its integration with other sectoral policies. Parliament will be responsible 
for  the  approval  or  amendment  of  energy  legislation.  Parliamentary  Committees 
are  responsible  for  considering  proposals  for  new  or  amended  legislation  and 
supervising  the  actions  of  the  ministries  especially  as  they  relate  to  the  budget. 
PUC  will  continue  as  an  autonomous  authority  body,  with  responsibility  for 
regulating  the  electricity,  water  and  telecommunication  sectors.  It  will  be 
responsible  for  ensuring  that  all  customers  have  safe,  reliable  and  high-quality 
services at affordable rates, while allowing a reasonable return on investment, so 
as to foster an environment that will stimulate national growth. In addition, it will 
promote  the  introduction  of  certain  minimum  percentage  of  RETs  in  electricity 
generation. 
E.  Government supports the present sub  sectoral split of the energy sector which is 
as follows:  
a. Ministry of Energy including power-electricity, hydro and other renewable energy 
resources. 
b.Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment -the traditional energy sector 
which includes mainly biomass. 
c. Ministry of Economic Development, Commerce and Industry, and Consumer 
Protection -petroleum marketing and sales. 
d.Geology and Petroleum Department - responsible for petroleum exploration and 
production. 
e. Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment - exploration and exploitation of 
minerals  
F.  Government commits itself to the gradual consolidation of the energy sector over 
the medium term. 
 
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
Conclusions 
 
The  National  Energy  Policy  of  Belize  will  allow the  entire country  to  meet its basic  energy  needs in a 
sustainable manner and to support and improve the national economy.  
The draft policy is focus on:  
  Developing linkages between the energy sector, poverty alleviation and economic growth. 
 
Integrating environmental sustainability into all energy initiatives. 
  Demand-side management and energy efficiency. 
  Developing an energy data bank and disseminate it. 
  Promote private participation and the development of competitive markets in RETs and services. 
  Develop, where necessary, appropriate regulatory frameworks and capacity.   
The  policy  will  be  the  basis  for  progressively  expanding  investment  in  modern  energy  production, 
petroleum  exploration  and  development,  rural  electrification,  the  supply  of  well  priced  petroleum 
products,  and  for  increasing  the  efficiency  of  energy  use  in  all  sectors  from  the  household  to  the  large 
productive sectors. 
The technicalities of the energy policy are important, but more so is its social dimension. The building of 
human resources is  vital to the effective utilization of energy and  its benefits. The implementation of a 
Ministry of Energy is vital to improve and develop the economy, reduce social injustice and protect the 
environment. In pursuit of this goal, the Ministry  will prioritize the policies contained in this paper and 
translate those priorities into action.  
The next step is to implement the policies based on an action plan for Belize. Most of the resources to 
move  this  NEP  forward  will  come  from  Government  and  from  various  development  partners  (e.g., 
multilateral  and  bilateral  cooperation  Agencies,  Global  Environment  Facility,  and  Clean  Development 
Mechanism, among many other potential donors).   
                                                                                             Proposal for a National energy Policy for Belize / DFAIT-OAS 
 
 
