Table of Contents:
I. Programme rationale . .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships .: Page: 5
III. Programme and risk management .: Page: 11
IV. Monitoring and evaluation . .: Page: 13
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
I.  Programme rationale  
1.  The overarching vision of the regional programme for Latin America and the Caribbean, 
2022-2025  is  to  build  productive,  inclusive  and  resilient  societies,  driven  by  effective 
governance, advancing towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Over previous 
decades, the region has seen significant poverty reduction, advancement of human development 
and increased well-being across multiple dimensions. As people’s lives have improved, their 
countries’ economies have also grown. However, while Latin America and the Caribbean has 
become  a  middle-income  region,  it  remains  the  second  most  unequal  region  in  the  world,1 
characterized  by  both  a  high  concentration  of  income  at  the  top2  and  a  high  degree  of 
vulnerability to poverty.3  
2.  Structural elements that undermine the region’s progress toward the Goals include:  
(a)  Low productivity (reflecting limited technological innovation and allocative inefficiency) 
is a defining feature of many economies. In contrast with factor accumulation, which to date 
has played the dominant role in driving growth in the region, total factor productivity has made 
a null (and in some cases, a negative) contribution to long-term growth;4  
(b)  Progress does not reach all groups evenly. Inequalities within and between groups persist 
across multiple dimensions of well-being, including access to public goods and services, 
voice and agency. For example, despite women’s increased labour-force participation, the rate 
still lags behind that of men (32 per cent lower on average);5  
(c)  The region continues to confront a set of (often interdependent) economic, political, 
environmental  and  epidemiological  shocks.  Such  “systemic  risks”  are  critical  for  small 
island  developing  States  in  the  Caribbean,  where  hazards  affect  countries’  entire 
populations, territories and economies;6  
(d)  Inequalities in citizens' influence undermine the responsiveness and accountability 
of Governments in the region. Currently, around three in four Latin Americans believe 
that their countries are governed in the interest of a few powerful  groups7 and just one 
in  four  has  some  or  a  lot  of  confidence  in  their  Government.8  Moreover,  where 
governance  fails  to  process  conflict  effectively,  societies  may  turn  to  violence . Latin 
America and the Caribbean is one of the most violent regions in the world, with particularly 
high rates of violence against groups such as women and girls, indigenous peoples and lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons.9 Political parity is also a pending issue 
in the region, considering that the share of women members of parliaments is below 30 per cent 
and only 15.5 per cent of elected majors are women (2018).10 
3. 
In  the  context  of  the  coronavirus  disease  (COVID-19)  pandemic,  structural 
challenges  have  acted  as  “pre-existing  conditions”  that  made  the  region  more 
 
1 UNDP, Regional Human Development Report 2021, Trapped: High Inequality and Low Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean, New 
York, 2021. 
2 World Inequality Database 
(https://wid.world/share/#0/countriestimeseries/sptinc_p99p100_z/XL/last/eu/k/p/yearly/s/false/20.593/26/curve/false). 
3 World Bank, LAC Equity Lab: Poverty – Poverty Rate (www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/lac-equity-lab1/poverty/head-count). 
4 Regional Human Development Report, 2021.  
5 Ibid. 
6 UNDRR (2019). Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. 
7 Latinobarómetro Informe 2021.  
8 Data for 2018 from the Latin American Public Opinion Project (https://www.vanderbilt.edu/lapop/).  
9 UNODC 2019, Global Study on Homicide 2019 (Vienna, 2019); OECD 2020, Addressing femicide in the context of rampant violence against 
women in Latin America; Global Witness 2019, Enemies of the State?: How governments and business silence land and environmental defenders, 
July 2019; SinViolencia LGBTI 2019 El prejuicio no conoce fronteras: Homicidios de lesbianas, gay, bisexuales, trans en países de América 
Latina y el Caribe 2014–2019 https://sinviolencia.lgbt/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Informe_Prejuicios_compressed.pdf 
10 UNDP and UN-WOMEN, 2020. “Surcando olas y contra-olas: una mirada paritaria a los derechos políticos de las mujeres en América 
Latina”. 
 
21-17460 
2 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
vulnerable to the pandemic’s impacts. Beyond the disproportionately severe health crisis 
and  loss  of  life,11  countries  in  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  continue  to  grapple 
with multiple economic,  social  and governance crises that threaten decades of progress. 
In 2020, real gross domestic product (GDP) contracted by 7 per cent (the sharpest contraction 
in the world)12 and an estimated additional 22 million people were pushed into poverty.13 This 
is  taking  place  in  a  context  of  increasingly  constrained  fiscal  space.  As  of  December  2020, 
central  government  gross  public  debt  remained  elevated  at  56.2  per  cent  of  GDP  in  Latin 
America and 88 per cent in the Caribbean.14 In the medium term, debt service is expected to 
crowd out other expenses, and over-indebtedness could restrict economic growth.15 
4.  The joint effects of the pandemic and structural challenges deepened many of the region’s 
pre-existing inequalities, as the most vulnerable were disproportionately affected. For example, 
this  materialized  in  rising  domestic  violence  (calls  to  helplines  spiked  in  the  wake  of 
lockdowns);16 growing gaps in educational access across digital divides as in-person schools 
closed (66 per cent of the richest quintile have an Internet connection at home, compared to 23 
per cent of the poorest quintile);17 widening gaps in employment and labour force participation 
between  men  and  women (women  are overrepresented  in sectors  negatively  affected by  the 
pandemic);18 and a divide between formal and informal workers in access to social protection 
schemes (between 35 and 82 per cent of the labour force are excluded from contributory social 
insurance).19  
5.  Beyond the pandemic, the region is facing other shocks. In 2019, protests revealed a 
collective  “crisis  of  expectations”  among  citizens,  reflecting  frustrations  over  unmet 
development goals and limited trust in institutions. In recent years, the region has also witnessed 
a large-scale increase in migrants and refugees fuelled by high levels of crime and violence, 
fragile institutions and inequalities. Additionally, the region continues to suffer from recurrent 
disasters  triggered  by  natural  hazards.  In  2020,  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  faced  30 
named  storms,  including  two  Category  4  hurricanes  (Eta  and  Iota);  in  August  2021,  Haiti 
suffered a devastating 7.2 magnitude earthquake.  
6. 
In  the  age  of  the  Anthropocene,  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  face  the 
increasingly urgent challenge of pursuing a development agenda that balances people 
and the planet. Continued loss of biodiversity, degradation of ecosystems and greenhouse gas 
emissions, driven by unsustainable  consumption and production patterns, have increased the 
region’s vulnerability to climate change alongside other systemic risks. Latin America and the 
Caribbean (in particular, small island developing States) is one of the regions most affected 
by the cascading negative impacts of climate change such as heatwaves, decreased crop yields, 
wildfires, coral reef depletion and extreme sea-level events.20 As women have less access to 
coping mechanisms, they are affected disproportionately by climate change. 
7.  Through  the  regional  programme  2018-2021,  UNDP  supported national  Governments 
and regional organizations to address many of the above-mentioned challenges, as concluded 
 
11 Despite being home to less than 10 per cent of the global population, Latin America and the Caribbean has faced almost 20 per cent of global 
confirmed COVID-19 cases and over 30 per cent of confirmed deaths. Authors’ calculations based on data as of 1 September 2021 from Our 
World in Data (https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus). 
12 IMF 2021. World Economic Outlook Update (July 2021).  
13 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) 2021. The recovery paradox in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Growth amid persisting structural problems: inequality, poverty and low investment and productivity. 
14 ECLAC, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2021 (LC/PUB.2021/10-P/Rev.1), Santiago, 2021. 
15 Cárdenas and Guzmán Ayala 2021. Planning a Sustainable Post-Pandemic Recovery in Latin America and the Caribbean. UNDP Latin 
America and the Caribbean C19 PDS 21. 
16 UNDP Latin American and the Caribbean, Director’s Blog: Graph For Thought. 2020."No safer place than home?: The increase in domestic 
and gender-based violence during COVID-19 lockdowns in LAC”. 
17 Regional Human Development Report, 2021. 
18 ECLAC 2021. The economic autonomy of women in a sustainable recovery with equality, February 2021. 
19 Regional Human Development Report, 2021. 
20 World Meteorological Organization. 2021. State of the Climate in Latin America and the Caribbean 2020. 
 
21-17460 
3 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
in the final evaluation of the programme. To boost productivity, UNDP supported countries to 
address  underlying  determinants  of  low growth,  including crime  and  violence,  weak  female 
labour-force  participation  and  unequal  access  to  digital  technologies.  To  promote  inclusion, 
UNDP supported the design, implementation and expansion of social protection systems. To 
build resilience, UNDP developed green recovery plans and integrated disaster risk reduction 
and climate change adaptation into national development strategies. To strengthen governance, 
UNDP  supported  countries  to  improve  State  capacities,  promote  women’s  political 
participation and manage conflict. UNDP was at the forefront of delivering a comprehensive 
COVID-19 response, spearheading the gender-sensitive socioeconomic impact assessments of 
the United Nations system and launching a COVID-19 policy document series (in collaboration 
with academic institutions) providing country-specific assessments of the pandemic’s impacts 
alongside policy guidance for protecting the most vulnerable. 
8.  These results were achieved by leveraging cooperation with institutional partners (United 
Nations  Entity  for  Gender  Equality  and  the  Empowerment  of  Women  (UN-Women), 
International Labor Organization (ILO)) and regional partners (Central American Integration 
System, Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) and the Coordination 
Centre  for  Natural  Disaster  Prevention  in  Central  America  (Centro  de  Coordinación para  la 
Prevención de los Desastres Naturales en Centroamérica (CEPREDENAC); and by fostering 
South-South  and  triangular  cooperation,  e.g.,  between  Cuba  and  Caribbean  countries  for 
strengthening  early  warning  systems.  The  final  evaluation  of  the  regional  programme 
concluded  that  UNDP succeeded in reestablishing  its  strategic  position  in  the  region, 
particularly  through  its  positioning  as  a  thought  leader,  its  promotion  of  data  and 
evidence-based policies and the technical capacity of its activities.21 
9.  The  programme  for 2022-2025  builds  on  this  progress  and  further  strengthens  the 
regional offer by  incorporating the lessons learned identified by the evaluation, based 
on consultations with stakeholders. 
10.  The following areas will be continued: 
(a)  Adaptability  and  responsiveness.  The  regional  programme  was  flexible  in 
adapting  and  responding  to  country  and  regional  needs.   This  was  observed 
during  the  COVID-19  pandemic  through  the  delivery  of  rapid  assessments, 
mobilization of resources and promotion of knowledge exchang e by UNDP; 
(b)  Knowledge  products  and  regional  public  goods  to 
inform  policy. 
Stakeholders  consider  that  UNDP  generated  knowledge  and  tools  that 
informed  their  countries'  policymaking,  including  the  Regional  Human 
the  Sustainable 
Development  Report,  Multidimensional  Poverty  Index, 
Development Goals Bond and the Policy Priority Inference Tool; 
(c)  Cross-cutting gender-sensitive approaches. By integrating gender equality, 
the  regional  programme  accelerated  development  results.  Stakeholders 
acclaimed UNDP efforts in gender mainstreaming, including  the “ATENEA” 
project  for  acceleration  of  women’s  political  participation ,  the  Gender 
Equality Seal and pedagogy spaces on domestic violence and care. 
11.  The following areas will be enhanced: 
(a)  Strengthen  demand.  The  regional  programme  was  seen  to  be  supply-driven, 
especially where specific tools existed. While not necessarily considered a negative 
issue, stakeholders recommend to fine-tune the supply to generate the demand22 and 
diversify the offer to be more adaptable to the region’s heterogeneous country contexts 
 
21 Center for Education and Social Studies 2021. Evaluation of the Regional Programme for Latin America and the Caribbean 2018-2021, 
22 Interviews with resident representatives and regional teams. 
 
21-17460 
4 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
and  specific  development  priorities  (such  as  in  small  island  developing  States  and 
Haiti); 
(b)  Innovation  and  digitalization.  Stakeholders  called  for  UNDP  to  spearhead 
innovative initiatives to accelerate development progress. A more proactive role in this 
area would promote the strategic positioning of UNDP and facilitate new partnerships. 
Consultations indicated a strong need for digitalization and data support, which have 
become only more relevant in the context of COVID-19; 
(c)  Systems approach. Stakeholders called for a more systemic approach that embraces 
complex development challenges. This implies concerted efforts to break out of silos 
and to promote portfolio- and issue-based approaches that leverage cross-border and 
cross-sectoral collaborations. 
12.  As countries recover from COVID-19, UNDP has an opportunity to accelerate the speed 
and scale of development progress in the region. While COVID-19 brought new challenges and 
exacerbated  existing  ones,  it  also  opened  new  policy  and  financing  spaces  to  advance  bold 
ideas, from inclusive digitalization to universal social protection and greener drivers of growth.  
13.  Considering the current regional context and the lessons learned, UNDP can leverage its 
institutional  advantage  to  strategically  partner  with  internal  and  external  stakeholders  to 
promote these changes and help countries get on track to achieve the Sustainable Development 
Goals.  
(a)  As  a  thought  leader  and  broker  of  knowledge,  UNDP  is  uniquely  positioned  to  deliver 
tailored,  timely  and  policy-relevant  research.  Thus,  it  will  leverage  tools  such  as  the 
Regional Human Development Report, the COVID-19 policy paper series, the effective 
governance narrative and the Latin America and the Caribbean research centres to deepen 
its ongoing country support;  
(b)  As a trusted partner for Governments, regional and subregional institutions, international 
financial institutions (IFIs) and the private sector, UNDP is uniquely positioned to develop 
partnerships  for  financing  green  and  digital  transformations.  Consequently,  UNDP  will 
strengthen  collaborations  to  expand  financing  for  development  as  was  done  with  the 
region’s first-ever Sustainable Development Goals bond in Mexico;  
(c)  As  a  regional  convenor,  UNDP  is  uniquely  positioned  to  leverage  global,  regional  and 
subregional networks to support the co-creation and implementation of local and national 
solutions. Regional inter-agency collaboration will be expanded to scale up partnerships 
like the one established with UN-Women and the United Nations Population Fund with the 
Spotlight Initiative in Latin America and the Caribbean.  
II.  Programme priorities and partnerships  
14.  To contribute to the overarching goal and help countries address the interrelated structural 
issues exacerbated by the pandemic, UNDP will implement an intersectoral portfolio designed 
to  tackle  complex  systemic  challenges.  The  programme  is  closely  aligned  with  the  three 
directions of change of the Strategic Plan and leverages the six signature solutions and three 
enablers  in  four  programmatic  outcomes:  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth;  equity  and 
inclusion;  resilient  sustainable  development  and  green  recovery;  and  effective  governance. 
These are grounded in the “regionality principles”23 with system-wide solutions to existing and 
emerging  challenges  that  cannot  be  addressed  in  silos  and  require  an  integrated  regional 
approach. Promoting growth (outcome 1) is critical for inclusion (outcome 2), but both must be 
 
23 Regional public goods/services; inter-regionality; cross-border externalities; awareness/action on sensitive and emerging issues; regional 
innovation; regional and subregional partnership-building; and knowledge generation and sharing of experience and expertise, including through 
South-South and triangular cooperation. 
 
21-17460 
5 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
done  in a way that is sustainable  in the long term (outcome 3). All three of these outcomes 
depend on effective governance (outcome 4) as a precondition. 
15.  The proposed strategy was identified as the best fit for Latin America and the Caribbean, 
based  on  analysis  of  the  most  pressing  development  challenges  and  an  extensive  process  of 
consultations  with  a  broad  range  of  stakeholders  to  prioritize  key  actions  areas  for  UNDP. 
Consultations  were  conducted  with  the  Regional  Bureau  Advisory  Board,  UNDP  resident 
representatives,  country  offices,  government  representatives,  academia,  international  and 
regional organizations, donors, the private sector, civil society and Member States, both at a 
technical level and with Permanent Representatives. As reflected in the outcomes and outputs, 
stakeholders  consistently  recognized  the  need  for  UNDP  to  tackle  the  drivers  of  low 
productivity  and  deepening  inequality  and  exclusion,  and  highlighted  green,  resilient  and 
inclusive economic recovery and effective governance as broad priority areas for  UNDP. To 
this end, UNDP will scale up regional and global best practices and expertise, adapting them to 
local contexts to complement national efforts through South-South and triangular cooperation, 
innovation, evidence and knowledge  generation and  advocacy  while promoting systems and 
portfolio  approaches.  These  efforts  will  be  powered  by  the  comparative  advantage  and 
positioning of UNDP in the region and underpinned by stakeholder engagement, donor support, 
the commitment of Governments to reforms and the availability of data. 
16.  The  programme  will  partner  with  national  and  regional  institutions;  United  Nations 
agencies (the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), ILO, International Organization for 
Migration  (IOM),  United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP),  United  Nations 
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and UN-Women)); IFIs (International Monetary Fund (IMF), Inter-
American Development Bank (IDB) and the World Bank; bilateral and multilateral donors; and 
civil society. 
17.  In line with the evaluation’s recommendations, country demand and the SAMOA Pathway, 
the  programme  will  deepen  its  engagement  in  the  Caribbean,  focusing  on  climate  change, 
institutional  strengthening,  citizen  security  and  disaster  risk  reduction.  UNDP  will  continue 
enabling  and  scaling  up  gender-responsive  disaster  recovery,  climate  and  environmental 
resilience in the Caribbean and promoting laws and policies that advance the rights of women 
and girls. 
Inclusive and sustainable growth 
18.  This outcome focuses on addressing structural challenges related to low productivity and 
the need for  stable  economic recovery in the wake of the pandemic. The outcome  theory of 
change  states  that:  if  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  increase  their  productivity  and 
resilience and improve their access to services, digital technologies and markets; if conditions 
are enabled for equitable access to decent jobs for women and vulnerable populations; and if 
public and private financing for development is expanded; then Latin American and Caribbean 
countries  would  benefit  from  reinvigorated  inclusive  and  sustainable  growth.  Through  this 
outcome,  UNDP  will  contribute  to  structural  transformation,  one  of  the  three  “directions  of 
change”  elaborated  in  the  Strategic  Plan,  engaging  with  the  UNDP  signature  solutions  on 
poverty, resilience and gender equality and leveraging digitalization and financing as enablers.  
19.  UNDP will work with Governments to develop innovative policies, tools and mechanisms 
that increase productivity, particularly of small and medium-sized enterprises; improve access 
to decent work for  vulnerable groups; and expand financing for development while building 
national  capacities  and  supporting  public  and  private  partnerships.  UNDP  will  partner  with 
national and local institutions to ensure alignment and ownership; the private sector to build 
capacities to enhance productivity; and the financial sector to find innovative funding sources. 
UNDP will collaborate with ILO, UN-Women, the United Nations Global Compact and IFIs, 
 
21-17460 
6 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
leveraging the experience of the Gender Equality Seal for the Private Sector to advance gender 
equality and women’s empowerment in the workplace. 
20.  To improve access to services, digital  technologies and markets for  small and medium-
sized  enterprises,  particularly  those  led  and  owned  by  women,  UNDP  will:  (a)  strengthen 
policies, mechanisms and incentives to improve the quality and access of financial, digital and 
capacity-building  services  for  these  businesses;  (b)  strengthen  normative  frameworks  to 
incentivize  start-ups  and  new  businesses;  (c)  support  the  transformation  of  value  chains, 
industries and sectors towards sustainability and  the circular economy; (d) foster access to a 
reliable  and  affordable  energy  supply;  and  (e) promote  digital  services  for  productivity  and 
resilience. UNDP will scale up partnerships with local and national governments, the private 
sector and academia.  
21.  To enable conditions for equitable access to decent jobs for women and vulnerable groups, 
UNDP will: (a) promote inclusive and intersectional labour policies integrating racial, gender, 
age and territorial variables; (b) support increased integration of women and vulnerable groups 
in labour markets to mitigate exclusions deepened by COVID-19; (c) advocate for the inclusion 
of the care economy in policies for increased women’s participation; and (d) foster equal access 
to digital skills. UNDP will partner with ILO, leveraging its post-disaster recovery and decent 
employment expertise, to strengthen social protection systems and improve inclusive business 
methodologies. UNDP will work with  the private  sector and academia  to include women in 
male-dominated industries, scaling up its experience in promoting gender equality in the private 
sector and generating inclusive opportunities in promising economic sectors such as renewable 
energies, efficient transportation, green jobs and digital industries. 
22.  UNDP will  promote  the expansion of public and private  financing for development  by: 
(a) facilitating  access  to  financial  instruments  (including  green  finance),  technologies  and 
services; (b) advocating for increased fiscal space; (c) promoting public and private investment 
in climate action for productivity and nature-based solutions, integrated with national visions 
for  sustainable  development  and  climate  change,  including  mitigation  measures;  and 
(d) supporting the development of laws and regulations that incentivize investment. UNDP will 
partner with UNEP on the regional taxonomy of sustainable finances and with the IDB, IMF 
and  the  Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  to  support  financing  for 
development. 
Equity and inclusion 
23.  This outcome addresses structural challenges related to inequality and vulnerability that 
have  been  deepened  by  the  pandemic.  The  theory  of  change  states  that  if  social  protection 
systems become universal, inclusive, fiscally sustainable and growth-friendly; if women and 
vulnerable  groups  had  greater  access  to  decision-making,  financial  and  digital  services  and 
increased capacity for asset accumulation; and if countries address social norms and practices 
hindering inclusion, then countries will benefit from greater equity and inclusion, leaving no 
one behind. The outcome is aligned with Strategic Plan outcome 2, leaving no one behind, with 
the  signature  solutions  on  poverty,  governance  and  gender  equality  and  the  innovation  and 
digitalization enablers. 
24.  UNDP will craft integrated cross-sectoral solutions by scaling up policy advice, evidence 
and knowledge generation, advocacy and South-South and triangular cooperation to increase 
the  inclusion  of  women,  excluded  groups  (indigenous  peoples,  Afrodescendant  populations, 
migrants, persons with disabilities, rural populations, LGBTI persons, people living with HIV 
or AIDS) and other vulnerable groups (such people living in poverty or vulnerable to poverty). 
UNDP will consult and partner with these groups in the design of policies and actions to foster 
inclusion. Rather than addressing the exclusion of each group specifically, UNDP will focus on 
the  structural  causes  of  exclusion  and  vulnerability  and  generate  tools  to  increase  access  to 
 
21-17460 
7 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
decision-making processes and productive services, assets and knowledge. UNDP will work to 
understand and reduce the digital divide that perpetuates exclusion. 
25.  UNDP will partner with national and local authorities, the Spanish Agency for International 
Development Cooperation (Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional para el Desarrollo 
(AECID)) and the World Bank to promote universal, inclusive, fiscally sustainable and growth-
friendly  social  protection  systems.  It  will:  (a) improve  institutional  capacities  for  integrated, 
data-driven  and  evidence-based  policies  that  reach  vulnerable  populations;  (b)  support 
countries  to  establish  fiscally  sustainable  systems;  (c) ensure  that  policies  are  coherent  with 
growth and productivity strategies; and (d) as a sector exacerbated by COVID-19, strengthen 
institutional capacities, policies and tools for comprehensive care systems that cover women, 
the elderly, youth, migrants and other vulnerable groups. 
26.  UNDP will work to increase the participation of women and vulnerable groups in decision-
making, access to financial and digital services and capacities for asset accumulation. It will: 
(a) facilitate  spaces  and  tools  to  enhance  inclusion  in  the  policy  arena;  (b) support  gender-
responsive  policies  and  instruments,  fostering  greater  access  to  services  and  promoting 
increased use, control and ownership of productive and financial resources and assets; and (c) 
contribute  to  developing  policies  and  tools  that  reduce  the  digital  divide  for  women  and 
vulnerable groups. UNDP will work with IFIs, the private sector and microfinance institutions 
to promote women’s financial inclusion and develop tailored financial products, services and 
gender-responsive financing instruments. 
27.  UNDP will scale up global partnerships with ECLAC, FAO, ILO, IOM, UNICEF and UN-
Women to advocate changes in social norms  and legal frameworks that generate exclusions, 
especially on gender and care. UNDP will generate mechanisms for a deeper understanding of 
the  multidimensionality  of  poverty  and  exclusion;  and  spearhead  knowledge  generation  and 
dialogue between different stakeholders from Governments and civil society towards greater 
inclusion of vulnerable groups. 
Resilient sustainable development and green recovery 
28.  This outcome focuses on addressing structural challenges related to recurrent shocks and 
the  need  to  balance  people  and  the  planet.  The  theory  of  change  posits  that  if  the  vision, 
strategies and decision-making for development in Latin America and the Caribbean are aligned 
with objectives for climate change mitigation and adaptation,  protecting nature, disaster risk 
reduction and resilience; if financial strategies and budget allocations support the transition of 
key economic sectors towards green and climate-resilient development; and if stakeholders are 
equipped  with  strengthened  capacities  and  opportunities  to  foster  sustainable  development 
solutions  and  enhance  their  resilience;  then  countries  will  benefit  from  resilient,  gender-
responsive and risk-informed sustainable development and green recovery. The outcome aligns 
with the Strategic Plan direction of change for building resilience, the signature solutions on 
governance,  resilience,  environment,  energy  and  gender  equality,  and  the  financing  and 
innovation enablers. 
29.  With an emphasis on Caribbean small island developing States, UNDP will promote the 
region's  economic  development,  considering  and  internalizing  the  socioeconomic  and 
environmental impacts of climate change, nature degradation and disasters. UNDP will scale 
up  practical  interventions,  generate  evidence  and  knowledge,  strengthen  capacities,  foster 
innovation  and  strengthen  intersectorality  between  different  levels  of  government.  It  will 
support policies, financing and governance for sustainable development and green recovery that 
reduce  power  asymmetries,  inequalities  and  vulnerabilities,  especially  among  women, 
indigenous  and  Afrodescendant  populations  and  those  affected  by  climate  change,  land 
degradation and mining. UNDP will safeguard the resources upon which the region's current 
 
21-17460 
8 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
and future economic growth and livelihoods of vulnerable populations depend, while enhancing 
the region's resilience to future shocks. 
30.  UNDP will scale up integrated solutions to build resilience through evidence-based, risk-
informed  and  gender-responsive  policymaking  and  planning  and  fostering  South-South  and 
triangular  cooperation,  especially  in  the  Caribbean.  UNDP  will  work  with  ministries, 
Parliamentary  committees,  academia,  national  disaster  management  systems,  CDEMA, 
CEPREDENAC, the United Nations Office  for Disaster Risk Reduction and donors like  the 
European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (ECHO) to promote harmonized 
agendas  for  climate  change,  biodiversity  and  disaster  risk  reduction  with  comprehensive 
resilience-building approaches and enhancement of existing human and financial resources.  
31.  UNDP  will  partner  with  ministries  of  finance,  national  and  regional  disaster  risk 
management  systems;  development  banks  and  funds  (Global  Environment  Facility,  Green 
Climate  Fund)); 
international  non-governmental  organizations  (NGOs)  (Conservation 
International, the Nature Conservancy); the International Renewable Energy Agency); and with 
FAO and  UNEP to: (a)  advance innovative financial de-risking mechanisms (such as  nature 
performance  bonds,  payments  for  environmental  results,  carbon  pricing,  tax  incentives);  (b) 
support the greening of value chains and small and medium-sized enterprises for sustainable 
production  and  consumption;  and  (c)  strengthen  capacities  to  leverage  multiple  sources  of 
investments to scale up risk-informed, gender-responsive recovery, energy transition, climate 
change adaptation and green infrastructure.  
32.  In  partnership  with IOM,  UNEP,  UNICEF,  ECHO  and  IFIs,  UNDP  will  strengthen  the 
capacities  and  engagement  of  sectoral  ministries,  Parliamentary  commissions,  subregional 
partners such as CDEMA, CEPREDENAC, NGOs, academia and indigenous populations for 
stronger  policies  and  behaviour  change,  including  at  the  local  level,  to  foster  sustainable 
development solutions and enhance their resilience. UNDP will increase the understanding of 
climate change as a driver of migration flows and strengthen capacities to better understand and 
cope with the composite nature of systemic risks (climate, physical and biological hazards) and 
put  in  place  strong  preparedness  and  recovery  planning.  UNDP  will  work  on  consensus-
building  and  facilitate  dialogue  among  key  stakeholders  to  generate  the  policies  that  would 
prevent climate and environmental change risks. 
Effective governance 
33.  This outcome focuses on addressing structural challenges related to the way actors reach 
and sustain agreements to resolve conflicts and promote development. The theory of change 
stipulates  that  if  mechanisms  are  enhanced  for  inclusive  civic  engagement  and  dialogue, 
particularly  for  women,  which  strengthens  the  legitimacy  of  institutions  and  builds  trust;  if 
solutions are enabled to strengthen  the  rule of law, citizen security and access to justice  for 
enhanced social cohesion, peaceful coexistence and protection of human rights; and if national 
and  local-level  capacities  are  increased  for  evidence-based  decision-making  and  leveraging 
innovation,  then  countries  will  benefit  from  structural  transformations  towards  resilient  and 
sustainable  societies,  underpinned  by  effective  governance.  The  outcome  is  aligned  with 
Strategic Plan direction 1 (structural transformation), the signature solutions  on governance, 
resilience and gender equality and the innovation and digitalization enablers. 
34.  The outcome underpins the other outcomes, focusing on the institutional functions (such 
as commitment, coordination and cooperation) needed to achieve productivity, inclusion and 
resilience for the benefit of women and vulnerable populations, specifically LGBTI persons, 
migrants and youth. UNDP will strengthen underlying systems, processes and structures that 
enhance how actors interact. With a specific focus on citizen security in Central America and 
the Caribbean, UNDP will scale up synergies with regional initiatives to provide policy advice 
and  advocacy,  promote  innovation,  evidence  and  knowledge  generation  within  government 
 
21-17460 
9 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
institutions  and  build  capacities  while  fostering  interregional  South-South  and  triangular 
cooperation.  
35.  UNDP will work with civil society and election management bodies, electoral assistance 
departments, national  and  subnational  legislatures,  the  International  Institute  for  Democracy 
and Electoral Assistance, the International Foundation for Electoral Systems, ParlAmericas, the 
Inter-Parliamentary Union, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR)  and  IFIs  to  strengthen  inclusive  and responsive citizen  engagement  and  dialogue 
between  institutions  and  citizens  that  promotes  the  reconstruction  of  trust  and  legitimacy  of 
public institutions. This will be done by: (a) furthering the integrity of political representation 
mechanisms in Latin America and the Caribbean; (b) fostering civil society oversight of public 
procurement and integrity of information; (c) enabling free, safe and inclusive civic spaces with 
strong protection of civic freedoms; and (d) promoting innovative agendas on climate justice.  
36.  UNDP  will  focus  on  the  rule  of  law  in  its  commitment  to  people-centred  and  gender-
sensitive justice and citizen security. Scaling up South-South and triangular cooperation in the 
Caribbean  and  Central  America,  UNDP  will  work  with  regional,  national  and  subnational 
institutions, NGOs,  academia, the  private  sector, multilateral donors  and  IFIs to: (a) support 
accessible, responsive and effective justice; (b) advance innovative institutional transformation 
and  action  plans  to  reduce  violence  against  women  and  girls  and  gender-based  violence  in 
public  and  private  spheres;  and  (c) facilitate  dialogues  and  consensus-building  to  promote 
peaceful coexistence while increasing equity and upholding human rights. 
37.  Partnering with national regulators, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization,  the  private  sector,  media  and  academia,  UNDP  will  support  institutions  to  be 
more efficient in the provision of public services, strengthening State capacities at the national 
and  local  levels  by:  (a)  producing  evidence-based  policies  and  providing  innovative, 
accountable  public  services;  (b)  strengthening  institutional capacities  to  curb  corruption;  (c) 
promoting inclusive and transparent fiscal policies; and (d) fostering laws and regulations for 
open data access and data interoperability. 
Alliances and resource mobilization strategy 
38.  The  regional  programme  will  pursue  client-oriented  partnerships  beyond  financing 
agreements to promote regional development focused on inclusion, resilience, productivity and 
effective  governance.  UNDP  will  scale  up  partnerships  with  traditional  global  and  regional 
allies  and  foster  new  alliances  with  emerging  partners  through  joint  programming  and 
cooperation  platforms,  leveraging  the  technical,  financial  and  political  resources  and 
knowledge of public and private sector partners.  
39.  The UNDP partnership and communication strategy presents an offer that is coherent with 
the external drivers of change and addresses internal risk factors to maintain the relevance of 
UNDP in the region while shifting towards a more diversified, sustainable funding base. This 
will be enabled through: (a) positioning UNDP as a thought leader and knowledge broker across 
disciplines to address government needs, in partnership with the UNDP network of research 
centres, the Inter-American Dialogue and the European Union; (b) strengthening the position 
of UNDP as a trusted partner to deliver development results transparently and efficiently; and 
(c) leveraging the UNDP position as regional convenor to mobilize finance, develop innovative 
initiatives and provide technical expertise at scale across countries.  
40.  UNDP will consolidate its financing partnerships with AECID, the United States Agency 
for  International  Development  (USAID)  and  European  Union  and  leverage  regional  private 
sector  partnerships  with  Visa,  AT&T  and  Grupo  PRISA)/Santillana  to  create  funding 
opportunities  to  accelerate  achievement  of  the  Sustainable  Development  Goals.  UNDP  will 
strengthen  partnerships  with  regional  organizations  like  the  Ibero-American  General 
Secretariat,  the  Central  American  Integration  System,  the  Organization  of  American  States, 
 
21-17460 
10 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
Community  of  Latin  American  and  Caribbean  States  and  the  Caribbean  Community 
(CARICOM) to address the root causes of structural development challenges.  
41.  UNDP  will  continue  engaging  with  the  United  Nations  development  system  within  the 
Regional  Collaborative  Platform  for  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  and  its  issues-based 
coalitions.  UNDP  and  ECLAC,  as  co-vice  chairs  of  the  platform,  will  set  out  the  strategic 
direction  for  integrated  and  coordinated  support  to  countries  to  achieve  the  Sustainable 
Development  Goals  through  regional  and  cross-border  analysis  and  initiatives  aligned  with 
national development needs and priorities. UNDP will also continue inter-agency cooperation, 
particularly regarding the socioeconomic response to COVID-19. 
42.  In line  with the  programme’s  priority areas, UNDP will continue  co-chairing the  issue-
based  coalitions  on  equitable  growth,  financing  for  development  and  governance  and 
institutions and the working group on youth. UNDP will participate actively in the coalitions 
on climate change  and resilience,  on  crime  and violence and on human mobility; and  in  the 
thematic working group on gender equality and empowerment  of women and girls,  the Peer 
Support Group and the Sustainable Development Goals Data and Statistics Group. UNDP will 
co-lead  the  Regional  Operations  Management  Team,  the  Knowledge  Management  Hub 
Steering  Committee  for  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean  (“SDG  Gateway”)  and  the 
Partnerships and Communication Group.  
43.  UNDP  and  ECLAC  will  support  the  alignment  of  national  development  plans  with  the 
Goals  and  target  public  and  private  investments  for  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable 
Development. Working with national statistical institutions, UNDP will help countries improve 
statistics on social protection, multidimensional poverty indicators and indicators for measuring 
progress towards the Goals. Through the UNDP integration platform for the Goals, UNDP will 
partner  with  the  World  Health  Organization  to  lead  a  multidimensional  poverty  analysis  of 
vaccine equity measuring vulnerability. 
44.  UNDP will support systemic solutions for complex development challenges at the regional 
and country levels. It will develop and implement cutting-edge methodologies to understand 
the interconnection, synergies, gaps and trade-offs between the Goals and to accelerate their 
achievement. It will also support data generation to monitor the Goals through partnerships with 
the  Commitment  to  Equity  Institute  at  Tulane  University,  which  generates  data  on  fiscal 
redistribution, and with the World Bank.  
III.  Programme and risk management  
45.  This regional programme document outlines the UNDP contributions to regional results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme. Direction and oversight of the programme will be 
the responsibility of the Director of the Regional Bureau for Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Under the direct supervision of the Deputy Director, the regional hub manager in Panama will 
be  responsible  for  ensuring  the  effective  management  and  monitoring  of  the  regional 
programme and regional projects. 
46.  The  regional  programme  2022-2025  will  be  implemented  in  consultation  with  country 
offices,  mainly  through  regional  projects  with  direct  implementation  modality,  designed  to 
scale  up  accumulated  knowledge,  experience  and  technical  competencies.  Regional  and 
subregional  activities  will  be 
implemented  with  targeted  country-level  components, 
coordinated  and  agreed  upon  within  annual  workplans.  Design  of  initiatives  will  imply 
concerted efforts towards more portfolio- and issue-based approaches. 
47.  An  Advisory  Board  (consisting  of  resident  representatives,  senior  management  from 
central bureaux and experts as needed) will support implementation, provide quality assurance 
and help validate the programme’s relevance vis-à-vis country and global activities. External 
 
21-17460 
11 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
oversight will be exercised as prescribed by UNDP norms, ensuring the involvement of internal 
and external stakeholders. Networks of existing and emerging partners interested in sponsoring 
regional initiatives will participate in programme oversight as needed. 
48.  The  regional  programme  will  apply  UNDP  programme  policies  and  norms  for  its 
implementation and quality assurance. Accountabilities of managers at the country, regional, 
and  headquarters  levels  for  the  programme  are  prescribed  in  the  UNDP  programme  and 
operations policies and procedures and internal control framework. 
49.  A  diversified  partner  base,  including  third-party  cost  sharing,  multilateral  donors  and 
private  sector  partnerships,  will  contribute  to  meeting  the  resource  needs  of  the  regional 
programme  and  minimizing  the  risk  generated  by  declining  regular  (core)  resources  and 
traditional other resources (non-core) funding sources. A resource mobilization implementation 
plan will be used to approach new donors and funding sources, including the private sector, 
leveraging opportunities identified in the regional pipeline. The total programme financing is 
estimated  at  $70.3  million:  $20.6  million  in  regular  resources  and  $49.7  million  in  other 
resources.  In  accordance  with  Executive  Board  decision  2013/32,  all  direct  costs  associated 
with  project  implementation  should  be  charged  to  the  concerned  projects.  The  harmonized 
approach  to  cash  transfers  will  be  used  to  manage  financial  risks  when  involving  external 
partners as responsible parties in the implementation of regional projects.  
50.  Despite  the  diversity  of  the  region,  common  systemic  challenges  imply  shared 
programmatic and operational risks that call for integrated monitoring and mitigation measures 
across all outcomes. 
51.  The  main  programmatic  risks  include  the  deterioration  of  the  current  public  health 
emergency, deepening economic and political crises, weakened rule of law, climate crisis and 
recurrent natural hazards, and a reduced funding landscape. These risks may cause operational 
obstacles to programme implementation. There is also a risk of a decline in political will for 
gender equality in national agendas. Emergency restrictions could have an adverse impact on 
the enjoyment of human rights. 
52.  Risks will be monitored through analytical and early warning mechanisms, embedded in 
risk logs and programme and project monitoring tools. While the regional programme does not 
envisage  any  potential  risks  to  the  rights  of  vulnerable  populations  or  the  environment as  a 
result  of  UNDP  activities,  UNDP  will  apply  risk-informed  programming  through  regular 
context analysis, adaptive learning and management to detect and mitigate early signs thereof.  
53.  Risks  will  be  mitigated  by  applying  UNDP  social  and  environmental  standards, 
accountability structures and grievance mechanisms. The UNDP enterprise risk management 
policy’s  contingency  measures  will  ensure  that  any  significant  changes  in  circumstances, 
including reduced regular resources funding, can be mitigated in an adequate and timely fashion 
by scaling down development interventions and deliverables in coordination with stakeholders 
and prioritizing the implementation of the Goals, crisis prevention and post-disaster recovery 
efforts. Other measures include: course corrections through adaptive management and revisions 
of  the  theory  of  change  to  maintain  programme  relevance;  maximizing  synergies  among 
initiatives,  providing  virtual  modalities  for  technical  assistance  and  accelerating  ownership 
transfer  to  stakeholders  to  mitigate  risks  to  programme  effectiveness,  efficiency  and 
sustainability; facilitating political dialogues, building a coherent United Nations narrative and 
supporting  the  development  of  regional  gender  equality  frameworks  developed  at  various 
regional forums, to tackle human rights concerns and political crises; and increasing resource 
mobilization efforts to address funding considerations.  
 
21-17460 
12 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
54.  Following  the  evaluation’s  recommendations,  the  regional  programme  will  improve 
monitoring.  Programme  outcome  indicators  will  connect  regional-level  interventions  with 
global  objectives  and  capture  the  UNDP  value  added  of  “soft”  assistance  beyond  tangible 
outputs.  
55.  The programme’s monitoring framework includes outcome and output indicators, which: 
(a) are  relevant  to  the  programme’s  focus  and  priorities;  (b) are  aligned  with  the  selected 
Sustainable Development Goal indicators and the UNDP Strategic Plan integrated results and 
resources  framework,  2022-2025;  and  (c) can  be  measured  and  monitored  efficiently  using 
varied sources of data to capture interconnections among results. Consideration was given to 
ensuring  that  the  output  indicators  demonstrate  regional  contributions,  including beneficiary 
groups.  Progress  toward  the  programme’s  planned  results  and  resources  will  be  monitored 
quarterly and annually in planning, budgeting and monitoring exercises. The programme and 
projects  will  be  subject  to  institutional  processes  consistent  with  UNDP  standards  and 
commitments. Annually, the programme will report progress and achievements in the results-
oriented annual report of the Regional Bureau. At least one project evaluation per outcome will 
be  conducted  in  tandem  with  the  programme’s  final  evaluation  to  report  progress  against 
planned results and provide necessary corrective actions. 
56.  The  regional  programme  will  use  the  gender  markers  on  regional  projects  to  monitor 
investments (15 per cent budget) and improve accountability, tools and indicators to measure 
gender results. Efforts will be made to minimize  the number of small investments in gender 
projects and help them incorporate gender actions and results into their planning and budgeting. 
At least 5 per cent of programme budget, proportionately charged to projects, will be allocated 
for monitoring, evaluation and communication. 
57.  A multi-year policy research and knowledge management agenda is reflected in the results 
framework through the  planned  activities and  expected  results. This agenda will be  updated 
through a continuous engagement with development partners, academia and think tanks. In this 
regard, UNDP will continue collaboration with its established network of research centres from 
across the region to provide cutting-edge knowledge and expertise to  Governments to better 
inform policies.  
 
 
21-17460 
13 
 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework  
Related SDG: 1,2,5,7,8,9,10,11, 12,13,17 
REGIONAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #1: Reinvigorated inclusive and sustainable growth, through enhanced productivity, resilience and digital transformations  
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions 
Outcome indicator(s), baselines, 
target(s) 24 
Data source and frequency of 
data collection 
Indicative regional programme outputs 
(including indicators, baselines targets) 
Indicative resources by 
outcome ($) 
Major partners  
SDG 9.3.2 Database, Annually  
I.1.1 Proportion of small-scale 
enterprises with a loan or line of 
credit (IRRF.O.2.3) 
Baseline (2019): 44.2 
Target (2025): 50 
Regular 
$1,300,000 
AECID 
USAID 
European Union 
KfW 
Government of Qatar 
Global Affairs Canada 
Paypal, Proctor and 
O 1.1: Policies and tools that enable increased 
productivity and resilience of small and 
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and 
improved access to services, digital 
technologies and markets 
 
 
Other 
$5,250,000 
 
 
 
 
 
World Development Indicators, 
Annually 
I.1.2 Labour-force participation 
rate by sex.  
Baseline (2020): Female: 47.2%, 
Male: 70.4% 
Target (2025): Female: 53%, 
Male: 80% 
I.1.1.1 Number of SMEs supported to boost 
productivity (owned by men, women and mixed 
ownership) 
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2025): 40 (Women: 25, Men:10, 
mixed: 5) 
Source: UNDP, Annual 
Gamble 
 
 
I.1.3 Share of individuals using the 
Internet. 
Baseline (2021): 68% 
Target: 90% 
 
I.1.1.2 Number of sustainable value chains 
strengthened 
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2025): 4 
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
 
I.1.1.3 Number of entrepreneurs supported to 
develop digital literacy (disaggregated by sex) 
Baseline (2021): 900 (Men: 500, Women:400)  
Target (2025): 3,000 
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
O 1.2: Policies and tools that enable 
conditions for equitable access to decent jobs 
for women and vulnerable populations 
 
I.1.2.1 Number of policies or tools adopted to: 
(e)  Foster equitable and inclusive employment  
 
24 IRRF = Integrated results and resources framework of the UNDP Strategic Plan 
 
21-17460 
14 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
(f)  Support the development of digital skills 
Baseline (2021):  
(a) 0 
(b) 1 
Target (2025):  
(a) 2 
(b) 3 
Source: National policy documents, UNDP, 
Annual 
 
I.1.2.2 Number of policies or tools that improve 
the matching between employers’ demand for 
skills and employees’ abilities.  
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2025): 2 
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
O 1.3: Tools and mechanisms enabled to 
expand public and private financing for 
development 
 
I.1.3.1 Number of instruments supported to 
leverage public and private finance for the SDGs 
(Regional-level IRRF.E.3.1):  
Baseline (2021): 1 
Target (2025): 6 
Source: UNDP Annual 
 
I.1.3.2 Number of partnerships with private 
sector partners to advance the SDGs 
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2025): 3 
Source: UNDP Annual 
Related SDG: 1,3,4,5,6,8,10,11,13,16 
REGIONAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #2: Increased inclusion of women and vulnerable groups through meaningful participation and access to assets, services and 
social protection, leaving no one behind 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: No one left behind, centring on equitable access to opportunities and a rights-based approach to human agency and human 
development 
I.2.1 Number of legal frameworks 
in place to promote, enforce and 
SDG 5.1.1 Database, annually  
AECID  
USAID  
Regular 
$1,300,000 
 
21-17460 
15 
 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
monitor equality and non-
discrimination based on sex about:  
(a) Overarching legal frameworks 
and public life  
(b) Employment and economic 
benefits 
(IRRF.O.1.9) 
Baseline 2020:  
(a) 71.4% 
(b) 75.5% 
Target (2025): 
(a) 75% 
(b) 80% 
Global Affairs Canada 
Swedish International 
Other 
$7,492,400 
O 2.1: Social protection systems enhanced to 
become universal, inclusive, fiscally 
sustainable and growth-friendly 
 
 
Development 
Cooperation 
(SIDA) 
 
 
 
 
I.2.1.1 Number of new or strengthened policies, 
legislations, and institutional capacities in place 
to increase access to social protection services 
by country (IRRF.1.2.1)  
Baseline (2020):6  
Target (2025):12 
Source: UNDP Annual 
 
Korea International 
Cooperation 
Agency (KOICA)  
 
 
 
European Union 
Japan International 
Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) 
Development Bank of 
 
 
 
 
 
I.2.1.2 Number of new or strengthened policies, 
legislations and regulations adopted to enhance 
investment and coverage/usage in national care 
systems by country (IRRF.6.1.2) 
Baseline (2020):4 
Target (2025):9 
Source: UNDP Annual 
 
Latin America 
(CAF) 
 
 
I.2.2 Number of countries that 
have increased coverage of social 
protection services (IRRF.1.2.2). 
Baseline (2021): 0 
Target (2025): 6 
 
UNDP annually 
Pirelli 
Uber, LinkedIn, 
Cortana, AT&T, 
and Visa 
Bill and Melinda 
 
Gates Foundation, 
Ford Foundation 
O 2.2: Policies and tools for increased 
participation of women and vulnerable 
groups in decision-making, greater access to 
financial and digital services, and capacities 
for asset accumulation 
 
 
I.2.2.1 Number of countries assisted in 
improving policies and programmes 
(IRRF.1.3.1-1.3.3): 
(a) Digital Services 
(b) Financial Services  
Baselines (2020): 
(a) 2  
(b) 2  
Targets (2025): 
(a) 6  
(b) 6  
Source: UNDP Annual 
  
I.2.2.2 Number of countries assisted with 
measures to advance women’s leadership and 
equal participation in decision-making in 
(IRRF.6.2.1):  
 
21-17460 
16 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
(a) Public institutions  
(b) Elected positions, including parliaments  
Baseline (2020):  
(a) 7 
(b) 5 
Target (2025):  
(a) 15 
(b) 8 
Source: ATENEA Annual 
 
O 2.3: Solutions enabled to help countries 
address social norms and practices that 
hinder inclusion 
 
I.2.3.1 Number of initiatives supported that 
address harmful social norms and gender 
discriminatory roles and practices (IRRF.6.3.2) 
Baseline (2020): 1 
Target (2025): 5  
Source: UNDP Annual 
 
I.2.3.2 Number of countries supported to 
develop and implement integrated and targeted 
interventions to include migrants, LGTBI, and 
vulnerable populations  
Baseline (2020):  
Migrants: 9 
LGBTI: 9  
Target (2025):  
Migrants:15 
LGBTI:10  
Source: UNDP Annual 
Related SDG: 1,2,3,4,5,7,8,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17 
REGIONAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #3: Green recovery based on principles of sustainable development reflected by integrated, equitable, gender-responsive and risk 
and resilient informed policies, financing and governance frameworks 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk 
I.3.1 Number countries with 
policies and strategies integrating 
O 3.1: Development vision, strategies and 
decision-making aligned with climate change 
European Union 
Regular 
$1,300,000 
21-17460 
17 
 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
inclusive solutions for green 
recovery (IRRF.1.1.1) 
Baseline (2021): 3  
Target (2025): 6 
Other 
$11,723,600 
Governments of 
United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), annually 
mitigation and adaptation, nature protection, 
disaster risk reduction and resilience 
objectives 
Denmark, Norway, 
Germany, United 
Kingdom, 
Netherlands, 
Switzerland 
Flanders (regional 
government) 
 
 
I.3.1.1 Number of countries with risk-informed 
gender-responsive national adaptation plans in 
place. 
Baseline (2021):10  
Target (2025):11  
Source: UNFCCC 
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
I.3.2 Volume of investment 
leveraged for green recovery, 
reflected through (IRRF.5.2.3): 
(a)  Fiscal spending 
(b)  Repurposing of fossil fuels 
 
 
IMF. “World Economic Outlook 
Update.” June 2020, annually 
USAID 
International Climate 
  
and agricultural subsidies 
Initiative 
Oxford University. Are We 
Building Back Better? Evidence 
from 2020 and Pathways for 
Inclusive Green Recovery 
Spending 
Baseline (2020):  
(a) 2% 
(b) X (TBD) 
Target (2025):  
(a) 10% 
(b) X-10%  
SIDA 
AECID 
JICA 
Global Affairs Canada 
KOICA 
Development banks 
Peacebuilding Fund 
Partnership for Action 
on Green Economy 
 
I.3.1.2 Number of countries with climate and 
nature agendas that promote: 
(a)  Nationally determined contributions and 
nature targets in macroeconomic planning  
(b)  Climate change mitigation potential of the 
forest and land-use sector in national 
planning 
  
 
(c)  Blue Carbon in nationally determined 
contributions 
(d)  Perverse subsidies' reforms 
Baseline (2021):  
(a) 2  
(b) 3  
(c) 1  
(d) 0  
Target (2025):  
(a) 5 
(b) 4 
(c) 5 
(d) 2 
Source: Low-emission development strategy in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, PROCaribe+ 
Frequency: Annual 
 
O 3.2: Mechanisms and tools to support 
financial strategies and budget allocations for 
the transition of key economic sectors 
towards green and climate-resilient 
development 
 
I.3.2.1 Number of financial policies for green 
recovery based on methodologies such as: (a) 
 
21-17460 
18 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
climate public expenditure and institutional 
review; (b) investment and financial flow 
analysis; (c) private climate expenditure and 
institutional review; (d) climate budget tagging; 
or (e) the Biodiversity Finance Initiative  
Baseline (2020): 6 
Target (2025): 11  
Source:(a), (b), (c) (d) above, annually 
 
I.3.2.2 Number of countries with financial 
solutions to enhance:  
(a)  Finance for biodiversity and climate change 
(b)  Capacities to access carbon markets finance 
(c)  National decarbonization plans 
Baseline: 2020 (a), 2021 (b, c): 
(a) 9 
(b) 2 
(c) 2 
Target (2025):  
(a) 15 
(b) 4 
(c) 2  
Source: UNDP, Annually 
 
O 3.3: Diverse stakeholders equipped with 
strengthened capacities and opportunities to 
foster sustainable development solutions and 
enhance their resilience 
 
I.3.3.1 Level of understanding of climate change 
as driver of migration flows and associated risks  
Baseline: TBD through UNDP scorecard survey) 
Target: Tentative increase by 10%  
Source: UNDP Scorecard Survey, Annual 
 
I.3.3.2 Number of consensual policies for the 
prevention of environmental and climate-related 
risks 
Baseline (2021):246  
Target (2025): 446  
Source: UNDP Quarterly 
 
 
21-17460 
19 
 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
Related SDG: All 
REGIONAL/GLOBAL PROGRAMME OUTCOME #4: Structural transformations underpinned by effective governance to shape resilient and sustainable societies 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive and digital transitions 
I.4.1: Percentage of trust towards 
institutions and perceived 
corruption index (CPI)  
Baseline (2018):  
(a) Trust 30%,  
(b) CPI 43/100  
Target (2025):  
(a) Trust: 60%  
(b) CPI 30/100  
Latinobarómetro,  
Transparency International Index, 
annually  
O 4.1: Mechanisms enhanced for inclusive 
civic engagement and dialogue, particularly 
of women, that strengthen the legitimacy of 
institutions and build trust 
AECID 
CAF 
KOICA 
European Union 
Regular 
$1,300,000 
Other 
$25,230,000 
 
 
 
 
Spanish Decentralized 
I.4.1.1 Number of countries with:  
(a) Electoral management bodies with 
strengthened capacity to conduct inclusive, 
peaceful, and credible elections  
(b) Parliaments with improved capacities to 
undertake inclusive, effective and accountable 
law-making, oversight and representation  
(IRRF.2.4.1) 
Baseline (2021): 
(a) 0  
(b) 0 
Target (2025): 
(a) 10  
(b) 5 
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
Cooperation 
(Madrid, 
Andalucia, 
Baleares, 
Catalunya) 
 
 
 
 
 
I.4.2 Rate of victims of intentional 
homicide and femicide per 100,000 
population, in (a) Central America 
and (b) Latin America and the 
Caribbean (IRRF.O.3.5)  
Baseline:  
Homicide (2020): (a) 20.9%; 
(b) 17.2%  
Femicide (2019): (a) 4.8%; (b) 4% 
Target (2025):  
Homicide: (a) 8%; (b) 16%  
Femicide: (a) 2%; (b) 2% 
SDG.16.1 Database, 
INFOSEGURA regional project, 
annually 
SIDA 
Global Affairs Canada 
Government of the 
United Kingdom  
 
 
UNOPS 
USAID 
World Bank, IDB,  
United Nations Trust 
Fund to Eliminate 
Violence against 
Women and Girls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I.4.1.2 Number of countries with strengthened 
capacities to:  
(a) Promote and protect civic space  
(b) Promote the integrity of information 
ecosystems  
Baseline (2021):  
(a) 0  
(b) 5  
Target (2025):  
(a) 0  
(b) 5  
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
 
 
 
I.4.3 Number of countries whose 
vulnerability to crisis has improved  
Baseline (2021): 0  
Target (2025): 6  
 
 
 
 
Risk Index, European 
Commission, annually 
 
 
I.4.1.3: Number of multi-stakeholder 
mechanisms to strengthen public sector agility, 
collaboration, and transparency (IRRF.2.1.3)  
Baseline (2021): 0  
Target (2025): 5  
 
21-17460 
20 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
Source: UNDP Annual  
 
O 4.2: Solutions enabled to strengthen the 
rule of law, citizen security and access to 
justice for enhanced social cohesion, peaceful 
coexistence and protection of human rights 
 
I.4.2.1 Number of countries supported to 
increase access to justice and no discrimination 
through:  
(a) Initiatives of e-justice  
(b) Measures to improve justice services centred 
on people  
(c) Measures to advance women´s leadership 
and equal participation in decision-making in the 
judiciary  
Baseline (2021):  
(a) 6  
(b) 6  
(c) 2  
Target (2025):  
(a) 12  
(b) 12  
(c) 6  
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
I.4.2.2 Number of countries with strengthened 
capacities to implement evidence-based 
legislation, policies, action plans and initiatives 
to prevent and respond to violence against 
women and girls, including femicides 
(IRRF.6.3.3) 
Baseline (2019): 16 
Target (2025): 21  
Source: Spotlight, UNDP, Annual 
 
I.4.2.3 Number of countries with cross-border, 
regional, national initiatives, policies and 
strategies to protect and promote the fulfilment 
of nationally and internationally ratified human 
rights obligations.  
Baseline (2021): 0  
Target (2025): 8  
21-17460 
21 
 
 
DP/RPD/RLA/4 
 
 
Source: OHCHR, Annual 
 
O 4.3: National and local-level capacities 
increased for evidence-based decision-making 
and leveraging innovation for improved 
sustainable development outcomes 
 
I.4.3.1 Number of institutions with strengthened 
public administration and core government 
functions for (IRRF.2.3.1):  
(a) Improved centres of government and data 
models  
(b) Improved delivery of people-centred basic 
services  
(c) Improved State and civil society engagement 
platforms  
Baseline (2021):  
(a) 25  
(b) 8  
(c) 4  
Target (2025):  
(a) 0  
(b) 16  
(c) 12  
Source: UNDP, Annual  
 
I.4.3.2 Number of countries supported to 
strengthen policies and public services with 
evidence-based and gender-sensitive approach 
(social protection, education, health, citizen 
security, judiciary services)  
Baseline (2021): 12 
Target (2025): 18 
Source: UNDP, Annual 
 
 
21-17460 
22 
 
