Market Barriers to Clean Cooking Fuels in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review of
Literature | SEI   Skip navigation Menu Publications   Commentary
Editor’s choice                                                   From pollution
to progress: Bogotá’s strategy for harmonizing climate, air quality and health
The next steps for offshore energy: 10 webinar takeaways
Local perspectives on global sustainability standards: Fairtrade and smallholder
coffee farmers in Indonesia
The quiet triumph of COP28: clean cooking
Back Perspectives   Features   Press room   Tools   Events   Projects   People
Centres   About      Announcements
Annual reports
SEI Currents 2024
Environmental policy
Global newsletter                                                   Back About
SEI Toggle the sub-menu       Governance   Organization   Contact   Strategy
Opportunities   Topics Toggle the sub-menu       Climate   Water   Air   Land
Energy   Governance   Economy   Gender   Health   Regions Toggle the sub-menu
Africa   Americas   Antarctica   Arctic   Asia   Australia and Oceania   Europe
Toggle the keyword search input     Search
SEI
Publications                                                     SEI working
paper                                                 Market Barriers to Clean
Cooking Fuels in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review of Literature
This working paper assesses the full range of modern-fuel alternatives, and
discusses the main market barriers – which are economic, social and political –
to their uptake. Published on 13 March 2009 Citation Schlag, N., Zuzarte, F.
(2008). Market Barriers to Clean Cooking Fuels in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review
of Literature. Schlag, N. and F. Zuzarte (2008). Market Barriers to Clean
Cooking Fuels in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review of Literature. Stockholm: SEI.
Working Paper. In the developing nations of sub-Saharan Africa, providing
households with modern energy services is a critical step towards development. A
large majority of households in the region rely on traditional biomass fuels for
cooking, which represent a significant proportion of energy used in the domestic
setting. The disadvantages of these fuels are many: they are inefficient energy
carriers and their heat is difficult to control; they produce dangerous
emissions; and their current rate of extraction is not sustainable for forests.
Transition to clean cooking fuels such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or
ethanol would resolve many of these issues as they do not produce dangerous
particulate emissions, and are commercially viable, offering a number of socio-
economic advantages over traditional options. Despite the benefits of fuel
switching, clean cooking fuels are rarely used in households in sub-Saharan
Africa. Their failure to attain widespread use can be attributed to a number of
market barriers. One of the major issues is cost: clean cooking fuels are
prohibitively expensive for many households, and the high price of compatible
stoves further discourages their use. Besides the expense, many consumers are
hesitant to adopt the new technology, reflecting the lack of public awareness of
the relevant issues. At the same time, Africa’s underdeveloped infrastructure
prevents these fuels from being made available in many local marketplaces. To
date, this combination of factors has largely stifled the transitionto clean
cooking fuels. National governments can adopt a number of strategies to address
these issues. The creation of clean cooking-fuel initiatives at the national
level would be an important first step, after which governments can begin to
address the issues more effectively. The introduction of relevant financial
instruments would help to tackle the economic barriers to clean cooking fuels,
and public outreach and education could overcome socio-cultural obstacles.
Through such a policy framework, national governments can play a significant
role in encouraging the transition to clean cooking fuels. Locality:  Global
Download:   PDF ﻿                           Related centres
Transiciones energéticas justas                                   You might also
be interested in
How climate crisis is affecting pregnant women and newborns in arid and semi
arid  regions                                       Media coverage  /
Air pollution, another environmental risk associated with climate change, is
found to increase the risk of low birth weight in infants and preterm births.
28 January 2024 / About Adaptation ,  Disaster Risk ,  Pollution  and  Short
lived climate pollutants
Makueni farmers bask in an elderly man’s vision of juicy returns
Media coverage  /
In an article by Nation, SEI Africa's Anderson Kehbila speaks on the importance
of value addition by farmers.                                    9 February 2024
/ About Adaptation ,  Food and agriculture  and  Sustainable lifestyles
Obsessive measurement disorder or pragmatic bureaucracy?
Other publication  /
This book examines issues in performance measurement and monitoring in the
context of the complex field of development aid.
5 March 2024 / About Finance  and  Public policy   Back to top Sign up to the
global SEI newsletter Get the latest updates and invitations to your inbox with
SEI’s global newsletter. Email address  * I accept the  privacy policy  and want
to receive newsletters from SEI Social media Facebook LinkedIn X (previously
Twitter)
Jobs
Press room
About SEI
Whistleblowing
Privacy policy
Cookie notice
Accessibility
Contact                                     Centres:
SEI Africa
SEI Asia
SEI Headquarters
SEI Latin America
SEI Oxford
SEI Tallinn
SEI US
SEI York                                                     © Stockholm
Environment Institute 2024                 Design and development by  Soapbox .