The evolving just transition: definitions, context, and practical insights for
Africa - IOPscience               This site uses cookies. By continuing to use
this site you agree to our use of cookies. To find out more,             see our
Privacy and Cookies  policy.              Close this notification Skip to
content Accessibility Links Skip to content Skip to search IOPscience Skip to
Journals list Accessibility help IOP Science home Accessibility Help Search
Journals                             Journals list
Browse more than 100 science journal titles                             Subject
collections                              Read the very best research published
in IOP journals                             Publishing partners
Partner organisations and publications                             Open access
IOP Publishing open access policy guide                             IOP
Conference Series                              Read open access proceedings from
science conferences worldwide Books Publishing Support Login IOPscience login /
Sign Up Click here to close this panel. Search Primary search Search all
IOPscience content Article Lookup Select journal (required) Select journal
(required) 2D Mater. (2014 - present) Acta Phys. Sin. (Overseas Edn) (1992 -
1999) Adv. Nat. Sci: Nanosci. Nanotechnol. (2010 - present) Appl. Phys. Express
(2008 - present) Biofabrication (2009 - present) Bioinspir. Biomim. (2006 -
present) Biomed. Mater. (2006 - present) Biomed. Phys. Eng. Express (2015 -
present) Br. J. Appl. Phys. (1950 - 1967) Chin. J. Astron. Astrophys. (2001 -
2008) Chin. J. Chem. Phys. (1987 - 2007) Chin. J. Chem. Phys. (2008 - 2012)
Chinese Phys. (2000 - 2007) Chinese Phys. B (2008 - present) Chinese Phys. C
(2008 - present) Chinese Phys. Lett. (1984 - present) Class. Quantum Grav. (1984
- present) Clin. Phys. Physiol. Meas. (1980 - 1992) Combustion Theory and
Modelling (1997 - 2004) Commun. Theor. Phys. (1982 - present) Comput. Sci.
Discov. (2008 - 2015) Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. (2015 - 2018) Distrib. Syst.
Engng. (1993 - 1999) ECS Adv. (2022 - present) ECS Electrochem. Lett. (2012 -
2015) ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. (2012 - present) ECS Sens. Plus (2022 -
present) ECS Solid State Lett. (2012 - 2015) ECS Trans. (2005 - present) EPL
(1986 - present) Electrochem. Soc. Interface (1992 - present) Electrochem.
Solid-State Lett. (1998 - 2012) Electron. Struct. (2019 - present) Eng. Res.
Express (2019 - present) Environ. Res. Commun. (2018 - present) Environ. Res.
Lett. (2006 - present) Environ. Res.: Climate (2022 - present) Environ. Res.:
Ecology (2022 - present) Environ. Res.: Energy (2024 - present) Environ. Res.:
Food Syst. (2024 - present) Environ. Res.: Health (2022 - present) Environ.
Res.: Infrastruct. Sustain. (2021 - present) Eur. J. Phys. (1980 - present)
Flex. Print. Electron. (2015 - present) Fluid Dyn. Res. (1986 - present) Funct.
Compos. Struct. (2018 - present) IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. (2008 -
present) IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. (2009 - present) IOPSciNotes (2020 -
2022) Int. J. Extrem. Manuf. (2019 - present) Inverse Problems (1985 - present)
Izv. Math. (1993 - present) J. Breath Res. (2007 - present) J. Cosmol.
Astropart. Phys. (2003 - present) J. Electrochem. Soc. (1902 - present) J.
Geophys. Eng. (2004 - 2018) J. High Energy Phys. (1997 - 2009) J. Inst. (2006 -
present) J. Micromech. Microeng. (1991 - present) J. Neural Eng. (2004 -
present) J. Nucl. Energy, Part C Plasma Phys. (1959 - 1966) J. Opt. (1977 -
1998) J. Opt. (2010 - present) J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. (1999 - 2009) J. Opt.
B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt. (1999 - 2005) J. Phys. A: Gen. Phys. (1968 - 1972) J.
Phys. A: Math. Gen. (1975 - 2006) J. Phys. A: Math. Nucl. Gen. (1973 - 1974) J.
Phys. A: Math. Theor. (2007 - present) J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. (1988 -
present) J. Phys. B: Atom. Mol. Phys. (1968 - 1987) J. Phys. C: Solid State
Phys. (1968 - 1988) J. Phys. Commun. (2017 - present) J. Phys. Complex. (2019 -
present) J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. (1968 - present) J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum.
(1968 - 1989) J. Phys. Energy (2018 - present) J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. (1971 -
1988) J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. (1989 - present) J. Phys. G: Nucl. Phys.
(1975 - 1988) J. Phys. Mater. (2018 - present) J. Phys. Photonics (2018 -
present) J. Phys.: Condens. Matter (1989 - present) J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. (2004 -
present) J. Radiol. Prot. (1988 - present) J. Sci. Instrum. (1923 - 1967) J.
Semicond. (2009 - present) J. Soc. Radiol. Prot. (1981 - 1987) J. Stat. Mech.
(2004 - present) JoT (2000 - 2004) Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. (1962 - present) Laser
Phys. (2013 - present) Laser Phys. Lett. (2004 - present) Mach. Learn.: Sci.
Technol. (2019 - present) Mater. Futures (2022 - present) Mater. Quantum.
Technol. (2020 - present) Mater. Res. Express (2014 - present) Math. USSR Izv.
(1967 - 1992) Math. USSR Sb. (1967 - 1993) Meas. Sci. Technol. (1990 - present)
Meet. Abstr. (2002 - present) Methods Appl. Fluoresc. (2013 - present)
Metrologia (1965 - present) Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. (1992 - present)
Multifunct. Mater. (2018 - 2022) Nano Ex. (2020 - present) Nano Futures (2017 -
present) Nanotechnology (1990 - present) Network (1990 - 2004) Neuromorph.
Comput. Eng. (2021 - present) New J. Phys. (1998 - present) Nonlinearity (1988 -
present) Nouvelle Revue d'Optique (1973 - 1976) Nouvelle Revue d'Optique
Appliquée (1970 - 1972) Nucl. Fusion (1960 - present) PASP (1889 - present)
Phys. Biol. (2004 - present) Phys. Bull. (1950 - 1988) Phys. Educ. (1966 -
present) Phys. Med. Biol. (1956 - present) Phys. Scr. (1970 - present) Phys.
World (1988 - present) Phys.-Usp. (1993 - present) Physics in Technology (1973 -
1988) Physiol. Meas. (1993 - present) Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion (1984 -
present) Plasma Physics (1967 - 1983) Plasma Res. Express (2018 - 2022) Plasma
Sci. Technol. (1999 - present) Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. (1992 - present)
Proc. Phys. Soc. (1926 - 1948) Proc. Phys. Soc. (1958 - 1967) Proc. Phys. Soc. A
(1949 - 1957) Proc. Phys. Soc. B (1949 - 1957) Proc. Phys. Soc. London (1874 -
1925) Proc. Vol. (1967 - 2005) Prog. Biomed. Eng. (2018 - present) Prog. Energy
(2018 - present) Public Understand. Sci. (1992 - 2002) Pure Appl. Opt. (1992 -
1998) Quantitative Finance (2001 - 2004) Quantum Electron. (1993 - present)
Quantum Opt. (1989 - 1994) Quantum Sci. Technol. (2015 - present) Quantum
Semiclass. Opt. (1995 - 1998) Rep. Prog. Phys. (1934 - present) Res. Astron.
Astrophys. (2009 - present) Research Notes of the AAS (2017 - present)
RevPhysTech (1970 - 1972) Russ. Chem. Rev. (1960 - present) Russ. Math. Surv.
(1960 - present) Sb. Math. (1993 - present) Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. (2000 -
2015) Semicond. Sci. Technol. (1986 - present) Smart Mater. Struct. (1992 -
present) Sov. J. Quantum Electron. (1971 - 1992) Sov. Phys. Usp. (1958 - 1992)
Supercond. Sci. Technol. (1988 - present) Surf. Topogr.: Metrol. Prop. (2013 -
present) Sustain. Sci. Technol. (2024 - present) The Astronomical Journal (1849
- present) The Astrophysical Journal (1996 - present) The Astrophysical Journal
Letters (2010 - present) The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series (1996 -
present) The Planetary Science Journal (2020 - present) Trans. Amer:
Electrochem. Soc. (1930 - 1930) Trans. Electrochem. Soc. (1931 - 1948) Trans.
Opt. Soc. (1899 - 1932) Transl. Mater. Res. (2014 - 2018) Waves Random Media
(1991 - 2004) Volume number: Issue number (if known): Article or page number:
Purpose-led Publishing  is a coalition of three not-for-profit publishers in the
field of physical sciences: AIP Publishing, the American Physical Society and
IOP Publishing. Together, as publishers that will always put purpose above
profit, we have defined a set of industry standards that underpin high-quality,
ethical scholarly communications. We are proudly declaring that science is our
only shareholder. Perspective              •
The following article is  Open access The evolving just transition: definitions,
context, and practical insights for Africa Monkgogi Otlhogile 3,1  and  Rebekah
Shirley 2 Published 21 February 2023  •                     © 2023 The
Author(s). Published by IOP Publishing Ltd          Environmental Research:
Infrastructure and Sustainability ,          Volume 3 , Number 1
Energy Transitions and Sustainable Transformations in Africa          Citation
Monkgogi Otlhogile and Rebekah Shirley 2023  Environ. Res.: Infrastruct.
Sustain.   3  013001 DOI  10.1088/2634-4505/ac9a69  Download  Article  PDF
Figures Skip to each figure in the article Tables Skip to each table in the
article References Citations Article data Skip to each data item in the article
What                                         is article data? Open science Data
availability statement The authors confirm that data sharing is not applicable
to this article as no new data were created or analysed in this study. The data
supporting the findings of this perspective are available within the article's
references and its supplementary materials. The majority of the perspective's
references are open access and are accessible via the links in the references.
Peer review information Method : Double-anonymous
Revisions: 2 Screened for originality?  No                       Article metrics
4835  Total downloads Submit Submit to this Journal MathJax Turn off MathJax
Turn on MathJax Share this article Article and author information Author e-mails
m.otlhogile@gmail.com Author affiliations 1   United Nations Development
Programme, Botswana              2   World Resources Institute Africa, Kenya
Author notes 3  Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed. ORCID iDs
Monkgogi Otlhogile  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2237-0750 Rebekah Shirley
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2333-2246 Dates Received  8 April 2022  Accepted  14
October 2022  Published  21 February 2023  Peer review information Method
: Double-anonymous                                           Revisions: 2
Screened for originality?  No                       Buy this article in print
Journal RSS Sign up for new issue notifications
2634-4505/3/1/013001 Abstract Sub-Saharan Africa is one of the world's most
climate-vulnerable regions, with impacts on food security already being felt
while the continent also battles unprecedented levels of unemployment and
economic recovery from the Covid-19 pandemic. The inherent connectivity between
the twin challenges of climate and economic vulnerability is becoming more and
more apparent, and the concept of the Just Transition is gaining traction across
development spheres to address these multidimensional problems, albeit with many
different interpretations. These varied interpretations of the Just Transition
movement can lead to vastly different priorities, policy routes and outcomes—a
concerning risk especially where the governing definitions and principles are
not produced, advanced, or owned by African stakeholders. This commentary aims
to bring more clarity and specificity to the discourse on Just Transitions in
Africa. We first provide a short history of the Just Transition movement and its
evolution, and then demonstrate how the term has become an umbrella for more
specific interest groups and communities, as seen through the expansion of the
Just Urban, Rural, Circular Economy, and Energy Transition movements. Through a
literature review, drawing from pivotal international examples, and based on the
authors' perspectives, we offer insights into the meaningfulness of these
distinctions and posit clearer working definitions. We then explore the direct
relevance of these movements to the African context through case studies of
successful local and regional initiatives and programs. This commentary aims to
provide readers with a simple, succinct, and structured explanation of the Just
Transitions movements, and practical insights for their further advancement in
Africa. Our exploration does not aim to be definitive or exhaustive, but rather
demonstrates that truly just transitions on the continent will require attention
first and foremost to consensus-building at the local and national level. This
will require shareable research and data about programs and initiatives for each
other to learn from, and significantly more climate financing dedicated to
African-led initiatives. Export citation and abstract BibTeX RIS Previous
article in issue Next  article in issue
Original content from this work may be used under the terms of the  Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 license . Any further distribution of this work must
maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal
citation and DOI. 1. Introduction: the shift towards 'Just Transitions' The
latest science from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) makes
it clear that climate change is an emergency that demands unprecedented, rapid,
and far-reaching global action [ 1 ]. Updated climate models show a shrinking
carbon budget that requires deep and immediate decarbonization in industrialised
economies, and swift action to ensure sustainable, low carbon development
pathways in emerging economies [ 1 ]. However, at the same time the climate
crisis is embedded within a global context of historic, systemic, and growing
inequality which perpetuates deep poverty, resource and labour exploitation,
unemployment, unfair distribution of the burden of pollution and emissions, and
ultimately heightened social and economic vulnerability to climate impacts [ 1 ,
2 ]. In the face of this complex and interweaving feedback system of created
vulnerabilities, local movements have emerged to advocate that a  low carbon
environment and a fair global economic system can and must co-exist  [ 2 ,  3 ].
In fact, these movements and 'frontline communities' argue that if the process
of transitioning to low carbon economies is not 'just', the outcomes cannot be
sustainable [ 4 ]. The focus must be on more than carbon—sustainability must be
a transformation of our entire global construct. These movements thus aim to
build economic and political power from the bottom up to embed the shift from
extractive and exploitative economies to sustainable economies with principles
of fair participation, fair distribution, and fair compensation and leave no one
behind [ 4 ]. That cause is highly relevant to the African agenda where
sustainable development and climate action must occur simultaneously to address
the unique social, political, and economic challenges of each country across the
continent [ 5 ]. This commentary explores, from the authors' perspectives, the
evolution of the Just Transition movement, its application to African contexts,
and considerations for transition initiatives and programs. Using global and
Africa-specific case studies available in the literature, this commentary
explores the structural complexities that Just Transitions initiatives in Africa
must address and highlights factors that have both aided in and impeded
successful transitions to date. Based on an extensive review of global and local
case studies we recommend actions to solidify and operationalize the Just
Transition concepts within African contexts, so that the breadth and generality
of the concept does not limit its own effectiveness. Ultimately, the authors
caution against the dangers of poorly defined concepts and argue for centring
community-driven visions, definitions, and principles. This writing is published
as a commentary as the arguments are based on our practitioner experience and we
are actively seeking feedback from academic and practitioner communities such
that this text can be updated to become a helpful reference guide on Just
Transitions, especially for stakeholders engaged in African development.
1.1. The origins of the Just Transition movement Just Transition principles are
widely accepted to have first been developed by US trade unions in the 1980s
campaigning for benefits to allow workers to transition away from hazardous jobs
in pollutive industries (such as nuclear and atomic industries) coming out of
the cold war and moving to peacetime economies [ 6 – 8 ]. The term broadened to
advocate for the development of new energy and extractive industries in a way
that secured workers' rights, pathways for their transition to alternative
sectors, and accounted for any negative effects on communities and livelihoods [
7 – 9 ]. Just Transitions integrated into European discourse in the early 2000s
where it had a strong association with the specific social and economic fallout
for coal-dependent communities and workers [ 10 ]. It became heavily influenced
by the Environmental Justice movement, also emergent in the 1970s–80s, which was
a response to the system of environmental racism that disproportionately exposes
low-income communities and those of colour to the impacts of pollution and
hazardous industrial practices and strips them of access to a clean environment
in which to live, work, and play [ 9 ,  11 ]. The Environmental Justice
movement, centred on concepts of distributive and procedural justice at the
local level, has fought for those impacted to have decision-making power about
their environment [ 7 – 9 ]. Labour unions sought to mobilise the Just
Transition campaign as a means of addressing tensions and creating alliances
between the labour and Environmental Justice movements [ 9 ]. Through
partnerships established between labour unions and environmental organisations
such as Greenpeace, the Just Transition movement offered a counter to the idea
that valuing job security and caring for the environment were mutually exclusive
goals [ 9 ,  12 ]. For instance, out of this collaboration the Just Transition
Alliance was created in 1997 and is still active in rallying the movement today
[ 3 ,  11 ,  13 ]. The Just Transitions movement was also influenced by the
Climate Justice movement, itself emergent as a response to mainstream
environmentalism's move away from traditional identities of race and class [ 9 ,
14 ]. As environmentalism was taken up by the US political class, it embraced
more individualist tendencies and adopted post-racial ideologies. 'Organizations
which became the voice for the environment in Washington D.C. were the product
of, and themselves contributed to, the migration away from ideologically-based
movement politics and towards individual consumer choices... and the free
market' [ 14 ]. As climate change became an environmental priority, the Climate
Justice movement emerged as a concerted attempt to re-establish the centrality
of grassroots and civil society movements in the discourse [ 8 ,  14 ]. Climate
Justice seeks to reframe climate change as an economic and political issue,
rather than a physical one, by directly relating the causes and effects of
global climate change to equality, human and collective rights, and historic
responsibilities [ 15 ]. Advocates have had much success incorporating just
transition principles into the global dialogue. Indeed, the 2015 Paris Agreement
preamble explicitly enshrines concepts of decent work and the Just Transition.
The participation of workers (including trade unions), communities, civil
society organisations, and other stakeholders in the development of transition
policies is a paramount principle [ 16 ]. The International Labour Organization
(ILO), a key voice on Just Transitions, begins its policy statement on just
transition affirming that the four pillars of the Decent Work agenda—social
dialogue, social protection, rights at work, and employment—are indispensable
for building blocks of sustainable development and must be at the centre of
policies for transitioning to sustainable and inclusive economies [ 17 ]. Thus,
the Just Transition has become a formally established concept. However, based on
this path of evolution there is now a wide spectrum of conceptualizations,
ranging from the narrower jobs and local environment focus to the broader social
justice and systemic transformation visions. Indeed, demands for a Just
Transition can range 'from a simple claim for jobs creation in the green economy
to a radical critique of capitalism and refusal of market solutions. This range
can make it difficult to clearly identify what Just Transition stands for' [ 18
]. While the broader framings are compelling, these definitions overlap heavily
with Climate Justice, perhaps suggesting a less niche role for the Just
Transition concept to fill. In contrast, the narrower jobs, livelihoods, local
community, and local environment framing is more specific, and that narrowness
makes the concept more actionable though less transformational in terms of
global system architecture and root causes of injustice. Tracing the deep-rooted
connectivity and co-evolution of the three movements described
above—Environmental Justice, Climate Justice, and Just Transitions—and drawing
on our own practitioner experience, we adapt elements of definitions forwarded
by various Just Transition alliances and initiatives, and offer the following as
a working and operationalizable definition of a Just Transition:  the set of
principles, strategies, and practices required to transition workers and their
surrounding communities into thriving economies that provide dignified,
productive and ecologically sustainable livelihoods, participatory and
democratic governance, and ecological resilience  (adapted predominantly from [
9 ]). We hope that this simple working definition provides sufficient structure
for measurable action while also being aspirational in terms of transformational
change. We are eager to have other practitioners' feedback and hope this
definition can be used and augmented by others. 1.2. The evolution of distinct
Just Transition 'streams' The growing interconnectedness of resource governance,
supply chains, global trade, and the geopolitical implications of new technology
shifts, means that even communities beyond the direct and formal workforce are
impacted by inertia or change. As such, based on the authors' practitioner
experience and corroborated through literature review, we posit that the Just
Transition concept has organically evolved into at least four distinct streams.
These are the Just Energy Transition, the Just Rural Transition, the Just Urban
Transition, and the Just Circular Economy Transition. These streams, while
distinguishable, remain highly interconnected with areas of heavy overlap. We
have found that people are most aware of the Just Energy Transition, especially
after the announcement at the latest COP of a $8.5 billion commitment from the
United Kingdom, the United States, France, Germany and the European Union to
assist in the decarbonization of South Africa's economy, with a specific focus
on its electricity system [ 19 ]. However, significant progress in mobilization,
advocacy, and action is currently being experienced across the lesser-known
streams. While these concept terms are in regular use, we have not found
literature that explores them together and helps to nuance their distinctions
and similarities. As such, we provide what we hope are the best-available
working definitions of these transition movements, along with specific examples
of both historic and current initiatives underway for each, drawn from extensive
literature review. There are possibly other streams that we do not acknowledge
here based on the limits of our practitioner knowledge and experience, so we
welcome feedback to update this text and develop a helpful reference guide that
provides a more systematic introduction to the Just Transition concepts. (a)  
Just Energy Transitions:  acknowledging that a transformation of the global
energy sector from fossil-based to zero-carbon by the second half of this
century sits at the core of limiting severe climate change, the Just Energy
Transition specifically focuses on energy sectors, both upstream and downstream,
to secure workers' rights, to provide social protection for affected workers and
communities, to remove barriers to integrating fossil fuel workers into clean
energy sectors, and to build the necessary workforce capacity to deliver clean
energy goals. It is often expanded to include delivering universal, reliable,
affordable energy access [ 20 ]. (b)   Just Rural Transitions:  putting rural
and indigenous communities at the centre of low-carbon food and land use
transformations is the goal of the Just Rural Transition. It is focused on
creating resilient livelihoods and jobs in the evolving rural economy through
the promotion of sustainable food production; good stewardship of land, forests,
oceans; ensuring adequate land tenure and land rights; and securing economic
compensation for communities that protect and restore critical ecosystems and
carbon sinks [ 21 ]. (c)   Just Urban Transitions:  by contrast, the Just Urban
Transition puts the urban population and urban workforces and livelihoods at the
centre of transitions to low-carbon consumer goods, buildings, transportation,
manufacturing, and industrial production, which all predominantly affect city
workers and communities. This agenda centres on alternative urban futures—that
is, cities where the distribution of environmental risks and benefits do not
disproportionately burden marginalised groups; where decision-making is
transparent, engaged, and democratic; and where policies seek to remedy
structural inequalities and prior injustices in the urban context [ 22 ]. (d)  
Just Circular Economy Transition:  the Circular Economy is generally defined as
the redirecting of flows and closing loops of materials, resources, and waste,
along the life cycle of products. However, the needs of critical stakeholders
such as consumers, workers, and affected communities, especially in the global
South, are often overlooked. The Just Circular Economy Transition focuses on the
needs of communities involved in the mining, electronics, textiles, garments and
digital technology supply chains which sit at the heart of technology-oriented
low carbon transitions [ 23 ,  24 ]. This movement focuses on labour, trade and
monetary practices, and policies that support and encourage sustainable resource
extraction, waste management, recycling, and repair throughout new low carbon
'supply loops' [ 24 ]. To further illustrate these distinctions, we highlight
both historic and more recent initiatives from the literature that respectively
exemplify the Just Energy, Urban, Rural, and Circular Economy Transitions in
practice across the globe (see table  1 ). As mentioned, though the Just Energy
Transition has more history in the zeitgeist, relatively newer streams like the
Just Circular Economy Transition have gained prominence, especially as waste
becomes an increasing concern for people's livelihoods and carbon emissions [ 24
]. These are each still evolving concepts, with different levels of engagement.
Therefore, it is worth noting that the initiatives in table  1  vary in scale
and are not to be seen as equivalents but rather initiatives that both showcase
the key tenets of the Just Transition movement (see our definition above) and
the 'stream' they represent. Table 1.  Examples of just energy, rural, urban and
circular economy initiatives. Stream Just Transition initiative Notable
achievements Relevance to stream Just Energy Transition Coal companies, trade
unions and the government agreed to phase out hard coal mining in the Ruhr
region in Germany in response to cheaper coal imports, increasing subsidies and
a national shift towards renewable energy in 2007. This was coupled with
investments in education, service, tourism and infrastructure sectors to absorb
the workforce and utilize existing assets [ 25 ]. Coal workers were offered
early retirement for those who had workers over 20 years, employee commitments
to re-train and re-employ workers to other energy jobs within the companies and
additional support for those who decided to transition to service jobs. The last
hard coal mine in Germany was closed in 2018 [ 25 ]. The Ruhr region presents an
exemplary agreement that included a slow phase-out of subsidised coal that
allowed for a clear and comprehensive plan for affected workers. International,
national and local planning and investments were mobilized to ensure that the
transition included clean energy jobs as well as a transformation towards a
knowledge- and tourism-based economy [ 25 ]. Just Rural Transition In 1995,
indigenous Mayan communities were granted rights to 350, 000 hectares of the
Maya Biosphere Reserve in Guatemala through community concession contracts [ 26
]. Under the management of the Association of Forestry Communities of Peten
(ACOFOP), the community participates in conservation activities, sustainable use
of timber and non-timber species and manages tourism services [ 27 ]. Between
2014–2019, the ACOFOP have created more than 7000 jobs and $50 million in income
[ 26 ] Less than 1% of forest fires in the MBR occur in the areas managed by the
community concessions [ 28 ] Now at over 500, 000 hectares, this area is one of
the world's largest certified forest areas under community management [ 26 ,  27
]. The gains of the Maya Biosphere Reserve community concessions showcase how
effective rural and indigenous communities can be at simultaneously improving
livelihoods and caring for critical ecosystems when given the ability to plan
economic activities, invest in and protect environmental resources over longer
periods. In particular, the ability to maintain a deforestation rate of under 1%
annually, is indicative of the communities' ability to manage a massive carbon
sink [ 27 ]. Just Urban Transition EcoCasa was launched by the Mexican
government in 2013 to address its impending housing shortage. The program aims
to improve the affordability, waste, and energy efficiency of homes. EcoCasa
provides real estate developers with financial incentives and technical
assistance to construct energy-efficient housing for low-income families. It has
also contributed to national housing standards and an energy performance
evaluation tool for houses in Mexico [ 29 ]. As of 2019, EcoCasa had financed 79
developers to build 57 859 energy-efficient homes for 267 456 citizens in Mexico
Using its performance evaluation tool, EcoCasa certified over 66 000 homes in
2019 It is estimated the homes built by EcoCasa between 2013 and 2019 could
prevent almost 2 million tonnes of CO2 emissions over the lifetime of the homes
[ 29 ]. Attending to the aging infrastructure, lack of affordable housing and
climate vulnerability of homes especially for low-income communities is
essential to addressing the structural inequalities in Mexican cities. The urban
population requires programs like EcoCasa to reduce the costs of building and
buying of low-carbon homes and to improve the standards of existing houses as it
means better access to jobs, services and less spent on energy, especially for
already marginalized communities [ 29 ]. Just Circular Economy Transition The
Ella Pad is a social initiative created in 2013 in Bangladesh that uses garment
waste from textile factories to make low-cost sanitary napkins. The initiative
was borne out of the needs of female garment workers who were forced into
absenteeism because of a lack of access to menstrual products and hygienic
disposal options at work [ 30 ,  31 ]. In response to the pandemic, Ella Pad has
been making reusable masks (Ella Mask) from garment waste and has been
distributing them for free across Bangladesh [ 31 ]. Garment workers save money
on sanitary pads. The Ella pad is 17 cents (USD) and can be used 5–6 times while
commercially available disposable pads are 23–29 cents. However, some garment
factories give them to their female employees for free The Ella Pad improves the
health and livelihoods of workers who would have to otherwise forgo workdays and
therefore, income [ 30 ] The Ella Pad makes use of textiles that would otherwise
end up in landfills, therefore reducing the waste and closing the materials'
loop in garment factories. In addition, the Ella Pad could provide a new revenue
stream for garment factories and workers in Bangladesh, which would further
encourage innovate ways of reducing waste in factories [ 30 ]. From the authors'
point of view, these branched Just Transition movements are integrally
connected, are derived from shared principles, and are the connective tissue
needed to achieve global and national commitments such as the Paris Agreement
and the Sustainable Development Goals in a timely fashion. However, as much as
there are agreed principles and some useful elements of distinction, Just
Transition terminology can be understood and used in increasingly divergent
ways, in service of different ideological views. Furthermore, it is often said
that these concepts are Eurocentric, catering to the more privileged challenges
of high-income countries. For example, there is a Eurocentric understanding that
existing and "proposed technoscientific 'solutions' to the climate crisis are
commodified and profitable" [ 32 ]. This interpretation of Just Transition,
however, can be detrimental to communities in the Global South [ 32 ,  33 ]. For
instance, with policy makers in Europe and the United States of America turning
to a Just Transition framework that addresses domestic environmental justice,
'outsourcing harm' to the Global South to ensure continued profitability could
further entrench climate inequalities globally [ 34 ]. Just Transitions in
Africa will have to look different in meaning and in practice. Considering the
unique social, economic, and political contexts in Africa, and given the upswing
in attention to supporting just transitions in Africa especially from the
philanthropic donor community. The discourse deserves urgent attention. The
remainder of this commentary serves as our argument for the relevance of Just
Transitions in Africa through exploration of the Just Transition movements and
initiatives emerging specifically in the African context. Our literature review
finds that while research on this theme is sparse, there are a number of African
Just Transition initiatives that warrant acknowledgement. We hope that by
pooling this collection of experience we can encourage academics and
practitioners to further expand the research and data available about African
dialogue, theories, programs, and initiatives at this critical juncture. 2. Just
Transitions in the African context The African Union's Agenda 2063 acknowledges
the need to refocus the continent's agenda around inclusive development,
regionally integrating supply chains, and commitment to democratic governance [
35 ]. Similarly, the African Development Bank has defined the Just Transition in
Africa as the means of improving the lives of the most vulnerable while also
building low-carbon, resilient economies [ 5 ]. We believe the Just Transition
concept has resonance in Africa as it has potential to highlight, address and
alleviate specific environmental, societal, and economic issues. However, there
are specific challenges in Africa that complicate this work, making initiatives
harder to replicate across countries and necessitating local examination,
leadership, and execution. The particularities of the African labour force and
the power imbalance between the Global North and Africa means that Just
Transition initiatives must consider not only the local context but global
linkages [ 34 ]. This has significant implications for the 'stakeholders'
involved in African Just Transition initiatives or policy. We provide examples
here, by focussing on how linkages between local labour forces and global
product flows influence the meanings of the Just Circular Economy and Just Rural
Economy transitions in Africa. These examples demonstrate how the defining and
execution of specific just transitions initiatives become a challenging
endeavour, and why community-driven framings and visions are so crucial.
2.1. Understanding the African labour force We are living at a time of
unprecedented unemployment rates which are heightened by the continent's youth
explosion. Over 34% of the continent's working-age population are 15–24 years
old with over 10 million young people pouring into the job market every year [
36 ]. Added to this, African economies are largely undiversified, depending
predominantly on agriculture, a climate-dependent, primary-commodity, export-
oriented industry limited in local value-addition [ 37 ]. In agricultural and
extractive industries, which comprise the bulk of African GDP, very few jobs are
formal wage-paying positions [ 37 ,  38 ]. This makes understanding and
accounting for the labour force, a key component of just transition programs,
very difficult. However, there are few incentives to formalise labour laws, so
Africa's record on addressing wages, social security, occupational health and
safety, migrant workers, human resource development, and indigenous peoples is
sparse [ 39 ]. This is especially important as the exemplary Just Transition
initiatives, such as in Germany's Ruhr region (see above), are based on strong
labour laws and do not infringe upon the rights of the affected workers [ 25 ].
As per our Just Transition definition and other examples above, the benefits of
Just Transition initiatives centre workers who are usually unionised, and their
communities. However, unionising informal workers in Africa continues to be a
great challenge [ 40 ]. The informal sector (see figure  1 ) currently accounts
for 70% of employment and 55% of GDP in sub-Saharan Africa, with nine of ten
informal workers being women and youth—the highest share of informal labour in
any world region [ 41 ]. ILO evidence suggests that women comprise a much larger
share of Africa's informal economy and are given fewer opportunities for social
mobility [ 42 ]. Wage exploitation and the lack of social protection often trap
informal communities in poverty and exclusion [ 38 ,  43 ]. Africa has the
largest share of informal work in the world (see figure below). This fragile
employment landscape stifles local spending, leaving economies highly
susceptible to external shocks and further exacerbating the continent's economic
and social vulnerability to climate change [ 37 ]. It also signals a different
approach to a Just Transition is required in Africa. As an example, informal
communities and others on the margins may be vulnerable to short term price
increases caused by policies that spur energy transition such as the removal of
fossil fuel subsidies, without formal recourse [ 44 ]. These policies could
further entrench poverty and inequality. It is thus critical that such policies
incorporate social protection programs, and consider formality of employment in
policy design [ 44 ].                          Zoom In
Zoom Out                                                               Reset
image size                                          Figure 1.  The percentage of
people who are employed in the urban informal sector across the world.
Downloaded from [ 45 ],  CC BY 4.0 . Download figure:  Standard image
High-resolution image                                          2.2. Global
dynamics and implications for Just Circular Economy Transitions in Africa These
untenable employment conditions are perpetuated in part by external forces as
well—the very same donor countries funding transition initiatives in African
countries paradoxically penalised their labour protections. Therefore, there is
a perverse foreign and national incentive to keep informal workers in a
perpetual state of non-protection. For example, to protect the local textile
industry and reduce waste (see Just Circular Economy Transition above), the East
Africa Community proposed a complete ban on used clothing imports (the majority
of which come from Europe and the USA) by 2019 [ 46 ]. The ban, coupled with an
increase in taxes on clothing imports by Uganda, Rwanda and Tanzania, was met by
action from US lobbyists and the suspension of some of their benefits under the
US African Growth and Opportunity Act [ 46 ,  47 ]. Additionally, as the world
moves towards net-zero, the same low carbon technologies that are often touted
as much-needed innovations can become sources of grave injustice when seen in
this light. For instance, the lithium battery's life cycle starts with
exploitative cobalt mining in the Democratic Republic of Congo and ends in
e-waste processing and recycling in Ghana [ 48 ,  49 ]. While this might be seen
as closing the materials loop of lithium batteries (as outlined in the
definition of the Just Circular Economy Transition), it is not necessarily just.
The lithium battery of an electric car may reduce carbon emissions in a
developed country but Africans endure the harsh working conditions of mining and
the hazardous living conditions of e-waste with little compensation, thus
bearing the burden of global 'decarbonization', perpetuating the very systems of
inequality that the environmental justice movement originally sought to address
[ 33 ,  48 ,  49 ]. Healthy and diversified economies cannot be sustained on
such a precarious employment foundation. Securing jobs, livelihoods, and
workers' rights is thus central to achieving sustainable and inclusive
development pathways in Africa. However, we can see the complexity involved in
focussing on workers in Africa, when work itself is a largely informal and
undercompensated exercise, a situation perpetuated in part by perverse local and
international profit-driven incentives. If the Just Transition movement can
articulate and highlight these often-unseen linkages, it can be an extremely
helpful asset for African development. Therefore, while the concept may have
originated outside of Africa, Just Transitions can be a useful adoption into the
African climate discourse, directly addressing the labour conditions of
vulnerable communities, and building programs and policies that link from the
local to the global. 2.3. Global dynamics and implications for the Just Rural
Transitions in Africa Similarly, consideration must be made for how African
farmers and agricultural workers are connected into global markets. The Just
Rural Transition is predicated on enabling farmers to provide the world with
food sustainably while also improving their own livelihoods. However, Africa
becoming a part of the global food and agricultural commodities supply chains
will require reckoning with how African farmers bear the brunt of volatile
commodities prices with little to no bargaining power [ 50 ]. For example, at
the start of the 2020–21 season, Ghana and Ivory Coast began charging an extra
$400 per tonne of cocoa exported under a scheme called the Living Income
Differential (LID) [ 50 ]. The LID was meant to increase farmers' incomes and
protect them from volatile prices. With the dampened demand for chocolate by
COVID-19, cocoa buyers have been circumventing the LID levy by buying cocoa
beans from the futures market. Farmers are now facing prices that are even lower
than before the LID was introduced [ 50 ]. To complicate things further, the
IPCC warns that climate-induced declines in crop production can increase local
commodity prices which in turn can affect competitiveness and patterns of
regional and international trade [ 1 ]. Smallholder farmers are particularly
vulnerable given the lack of linkages to fair markets, lack of opportunity for
value-addition, and lack of price-setting power. For instance, experts are
concerned that under the Africa Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA)
smallholder farmers may be further exposed to increased competition without the
ability to access markets, deliver better-quality produce, or engage in value-
addition [ 51 ]. Studies that simulate the impact of climate shocks on future
agricultural trade find that Africa is likely to see the most negative impacts
on welfare, the burden of which will be borne by smallholder farmers, further
reducing the continent's adaptive capacity [ 52 ]. Thus, international, and
regional trade policy is directly connected to the Just Rural Transition in
Africa and how we plan for food systems transformations that can provide
climate-resilient jobs and livelihoods (see Just Rural Transition above).
2.4. Local interlinkages and implications for Just Transitions in Africa Through
exploring the dynamics of African labour and global markets, we see the
potential opportunity of systemic change that Just Transitions could represent,
and the challenges in delivering these visions. We have offered the example of
Just Circular Economy and Rural Transitions, but the same applies to all four
chords of the Just Transitions movement, which are closely knotted in Africa in
part due to these local-global dynamics. Thus, we believe that planning for a
Just Transition in Africa will require experts to acknowledge, plan for and
maximize where the Just Transition streams overlap. An example of the streams
overlapping is that of the Just Rural and Just Urban Transition in Africa. A
large share of Africa's growing urban population resides in what are classified
as secondary and tertiary towns, closely tied to the agricultural activity in
surrounding rural areas [ 53 ]. These urban areas often do not exhibit the
dramatic shift from agricultural to non-agricultural activities and employment
that economic theories or traditional definitions of urbanisation presume [ 53
]. Farming and agri-food systems are likely to play a significant role in
employment growth in these towns [ 53 ,  54 ]. Food systems transformations will
thus be critical to delivering economic and livelihood bases in both rural and
urban contexts in Africa. Just Transition policies and programs will need to be
developed with both rural and urban communities considered. Likewise, increased
food demand in these growing cities has led to projections that African
agribusiness could be a trillion-dollar market by 2030. Local value-addition is
expanding, and electricity demand for agro-processing is growing rapidly. Clean,
decentralised energy technologies, such as mini-grids, have an important role to
play in servicing the near-term agro-processing needs of the thousands of
communities without reliable grid access [ 55 ]. Productive use of energy in
agriculture may not only expand energy access opportunities but also generate
strong jobs multiplier effects in the energy sector as well as downstream agri-
food sector and broader non-farm economy-diversifying job opportunities in rural
areas, secondary and tertiary cities. This has important gender implications, as
women and youth are the hardest impacted by the dearth of rural employment
opportunities [ 56 ]. Similarly, rural access to transportation and the
potential for electric mobility interventions represents another important area
of overlap between the Just Rural and Just Energy spaces. Thus, as with the
tight linkages between African economies and global market dynamics, the local
interlinkages have significant implications for the definition, design, and
evaluation of Just Transitions initiatives. The risk of poorly defined or ill-
contextualised concepts driving the Africa agenda can turn into false solutions
that ultimately do not benefit affected communities. Actions taken in the name
of a 'just transition' can accentuate inequalities and socio-economic divisions
by not fully considering the deep local and global linkages. This is an
important nuance to articulate because while global transitions to low-carbon
economies may be inevitable, justice is not. For instance, market-based
solutions that perpetuate the commodification of local resources in the name of
carbon offsetting and job creation can maladapt those communities and ecosystems
to a changing climate [ 34 ]. Likewise, as we have demonstrated, global
industries that decarbonize in the name of the green economy while remaining
profitable through continued exploitation of workers in vulnerable countries can
widen the inequality divide, further destabilising these communities (see
lithium battery example above) [ 34 ,  49 ]. Thus, clear, inclusive, community-
driven, consensus-built principles for Just Transitions in Africa are critical.
3. Interpreting Just Transitions for Africa: from concepts to practice To gain a
better grasp of the intrinsic differences that Just Transition initiatives may
encounter in Africa, the authors undertook a literature review of initiatives
across the continent. Table  2  provides a precursory and non-exhaustive
landscape of Just Transition initiatives across the continent, highlighting
notable achievements, sources of funding, and the various levels of leadership —
from the community level to the national level. We found that the majority of
the initiatives are very recent (see the Just Energy and Just Urban Transition
examples in table  2 ) which makes gleaning programmatic guidance from them very
difficult. In addition, projects like the Western Cape Industrial Symbiosis
Programme (WISP) in South Africa are the first of their kind in Africa [ 57 ].
Though WISP is a successful example of a Just Circular Economy initiative, as
one of very few on the continent, its design and structure may not necessarily
be transferable, and may offer less productive results in other local contexts.
Finally, despite being one of the oldest Just Transition initiatives in Africa,
the 15 year-old Great Green Wall (GGW) programme has been plagued with the many
issues raised in section  2 . For instance, the GGW has faced a lack of funding,
a lack of coordination and effective communication between countries, and
varying records of land rights in the Sahel countries, especially at the village
level [ 58 ,  59 ]. These issues have made land restoration slow and in certain
places, the restoration has come to a halt [ 59 ]. However, even with
accelerating desertification and the latest funding pledge from the Global North
yet to be disbursed, the GGW is still intent on improving the livelihoods of the
most vulnerable in the Sahel [ 58 ,  60 ]. Table 2.  Characterization of Just
Transition initiatives across Africa. Stream Just Transition initiative
Initiative's leadership Funding Notable achievements Just Energy Transition The
Just Energy Transition Partnership (JETP) is an agreement struck in 2021 between
the governments of South Africa, France, Germany, the UK, the US and the
European Union to support and accelerate South Africa's decarbonisation efforts
in the next 5 years [ 63 ]. In South Africa, most of the JETP funding is
expected to be directed to Eskom, the power utility [ 19 ]. The President
Climate Commission, through the Presidential Climate Finance Task Team is
expected to play a major role in the negotiation and management of funds [ 61 ,
65 ]. $8.5 billion has been made available to South Africa through the JETP over
the next 3–5 years through various mechanisms including grants, concessional
loans, and investments [ 19 ]. South Africa will require over $250 billion over
the next 30 years to transition completely [ 62 ]. The JETP is expected to
prevent up to 1–1.5 gigatons of emissions over the next 20 years [ 63 ]. Just
Rural Transition Africa's Great Green Wall (GGW) programme is designed to
restore land in over 20 countries to combat desertification and improve
agricultural productivity in the Sahel [ 66 ]. The GGW aims to restore 100
million hectares and to create 10 million jobs in rural areas [ 67 ]. Launched
by the African Union in 2007, the GGW is headed by the presidents of the
implementing countries under the Pan-African Agency for the Great Green Wall [
68 ]. Their international partners include FAO, World Bank, EU and GEF amongst
others [ 69 ]. Having had insufficient and inconsistent funds throughout the
years, after COP-26, $19 billion was pledged and a half has already been
committed [ 59 ,  68 ]. Senegal has planted 12 million drought-resistant trees
and Niger is producing 500 000 additional tonnes of grain per year after land
restoration [ 70 ]. Just Urban Transition Acorn Holdings in Kenya became the
first to close on a green bond in the country in 2019. The Climate Bonds
certified issuance was intended to finance green buildings for 5000 university
students in Nairobi [ 71 ]. Acorn Holdings $40 million [ 71 ]. The first tranche
attracted double the minimum that Acorn set while the second tranche of the
green bond was oversubscribed by 146%. The additional funding has increased the
number of beds to over 7000 [ 72 ]. Just Circular Economy Transition Western
Cape Industrial Symbiosis Programme (WISP) is Africa's first industrial
symbiosis project and provides free facilitation services in 2013. WISP matches
companies across industries so that under-utilised and waste resources from one
company can be recovered, reprocessed and re-used by others [ 57 ]. WISP is
funded by the City of Cape Town and is delivered by GreenCape, a non-profit
organisation [ 57 ].   Over the last eight years, WISP has resulted in 119 000
tonnes of waste diverted from landfills, 362 000 fossil greenhouse gas emissions
saved and over $9 million generated in financial benefits [ 73 ].
Similarly, South Africa's Presidential Climate Commission towards a Just
Transition has been lauded for moving quickly on its framework, which includes a
Just Transition definition and timeline specific to South Africa [ 61 ]. South
African private, public and development finance institutions are well placed to
finance the energy transition domestically. Many of them are already invested in
renewable energy through the Renewable Energy Independent Power Producers
Procurement Programme and have the experience necessary to manage and finance
new energy infrastructure investments in South Africa [ 62 ]. However, the
estimated $250 billion needed over the next 30 years as compared to the initial
$8.5 million pledged by the Just Energy Transition partnership (JETP) (see table
below) has raised concerns about the pace and types of funding needed to achieve
a timely and net-zero transition [ 61 – 63 ]. Additionally, the disbursement of
the $8.5 billion has been hampered by negotiations between South Africa and its
partner countries about how the funds should be spent [ 64 ]. South Africa is
acutely aware that they will require significant private and public capital from
both domestic and international financial institutions to implement its Just
Transition [ 61 ]. The JETP is expected to play a significant role in catalysing
transition finance in South Africa and around the world as others look to South
Africa as a contemporary example for the Global South [ 19 ,  62 ].
3.1. Addressing the challenges of the African Just Transition African activists,
youth groups, trade unions, civil society, and researchers are now deeply
engaged in raising much-needed awareness on Just Transition and identifying
challenges such as those in sections  2  and  3 . This vision varies by region,
country, and group, producing many interpretations of what Just Transition looks
like in practice [ 74 ]. Despite the promise of the initiatives in table  2  and
many like them, they are often plagued by insufficient funding, administrative
issues and many of the systemic roadblocks that have come with Covid-19. Not
only do African countries have to maintain and expand their current initiatives,
but they also must contend with the rapid shift necessary as a result of the
dire climate consequences in Africa [ 75 ]. While COP-26 was a watershed moment
for just transitions and for African climate financing, major gaps remain in the
interpretation and thus execution of just transitions in the African context.
For example: What does it mean programmatically and politically to develop and
implement a Just Transition agenda in Africa's hydrocarbon, agriculture, or
mining-dependent economies? How do we ensure that historically marginalised
voices and voices at various 'power levels' are included when planning and
implementing Just Transition initiatives in Africa? How do we ensure that the
Just Transition in Africa does not reinforce local, regional, and global
inequalities and biases such as the under-representation of women and other
marginalised groups in governance and formal employment? How do we pursue,
recognize, monitor, and measure 'Just' Transitions in Africa, especially when
the funding comes with pre-determined definitions and uses? How do we account
for variation across contexts in developing evaluative frameworks? 4. Where to
from here for Africa? African countries require attention to and financing for a
comprehensive COVID-19 response and recovery, poverty reduction, and the
institutionalisation of a low-carbon, fair and inclusive future. Supporting the
tenets of a Just Transition and Africa's development simultaneously will thus be
a crucial yet enormous feat. The Just Transition framework is still actively
evolving. How the movement advances in Africa could have ramifications for its
evolution more globally, especially given the turn to an African presidency for
the next UNFCCC COP [ 76 ]. For instance, it remains to be seen how local trade
unions in Africa will continue to position themselves in the context of climate
and energy diplomacy. This global climate juncture represents an opportunity for
African countries to pivot to healthy, people-centred, sustainable economies,
and the Just Transition movement perhaps has greater relevance now more than
ever. This is a crucial time to develop local visions and bridge the conceptual-
communicative gaps between non-state actors, national policymakers, and
subnational planners in Africa. The transition must be Africa-led. The public
discourse that is currently taking place is essential to making sure that no one
is left behind. To strengthen, expand and apply this discourse, we recommend the
following: Create dialogue spaces at the international and national levels to
contribute to a common understanding of the concept of a Just Transition for
Africa. These spaces should include marginalised voices and engage various
stakeholders across the Just Transition streams (Urban, Rural, Energy and
Circular Economy). Engage funding agencies and high-income countries to share
accurate and complete information about the availability and terms of climate
finance for Africa. Expand on the research and data available to the public
about transition programs and initiatives in Africa and globally. In particular,
sharing experiences, practical programmatic guidelines and policy
recommendations will be integral to clarifying the pathway for the African
transition. We hope that this commentary has been useful to our reading
audience. We aim to bring more clarity and specificity to the discourse on Just
Transitions in Africa by looking at the history of the movement, its evolution,
and examples of Just Transition initiatives in practice. We aim to communicate
the heightened relevance of Just Transitions to Africa, given the centrality of
unprotected workers and communities to African economy, and the heightened
challenge of delivering Just Transitions in Africa given the myriad of global
and local interconnectivities. Our exploration does not aim to be definitive or
exhaustive, but rather simply aims to demonstrate that truly just transitions on
the continent will require attention first and foremost to consensus-building at
the local and national level. We hope that our perspective provides useful
insight to African development stakeholders and the international community
working engaged in designing and advocating Just Transitions in Africa. Data
availability statement The authors confirm that data sharing is not applicable
to this article as no new data were created or analysed in this study. The data
supporting the findings of this perspective are available within the article's
references and its supplementary materials. The majority of the perspective's
references are open access and are accessible via the links in the references.
Show References Please wait… references are loading.  Back to top
10.1088/2634-4505/ac9a69 You may also like Journal articles Practical Solutions
for Energy Transition Emerging in Sub-Saharan Africa Who's fighting for
justice?: advocacy in energy justice and just transition scholarship Navigating
tensions between rapid and just low-carbon transitions Coal transitions—part 1:
a systematic map and review of case study learnings from regional, national, and
local coal phase-out experiences From Hydrogen Manifesto, through Green Deal and
Just Transition, to Clean Energy Act What are the social outcomes of climate
policies? A systematic map and review of the ex-post literature IOPscience
Journals Books IOP Conference Series About IOPscience Contact Us Developing
countries access IOP Publishing open                                 access
policy Accessibility IOP Publishing Copyright 2024 IOP Publishing Terms and
Conditions Disclaimer Privacy                                 and Cookie Policy
Publishing Support Authors Reviewers Conference
Organisers This site uses cookies . By continuing to use this           site you
agree to our use of cookies. IOP Publishing Twitter page IOP Publishing Facebook
page IOP Publishing LinkedIn page IOP Publishing Youtube page IOP Publishing
WeChat QR code IOP Publishing Weibo page