                         DP/DCP/GAB/4 
United  Nations   
 
Executive  Board  of the 
United Nations  Development 
Programme,  the United Nations 
Population  Fund and the   
United Nations  Office  for Project 
Services 
 
 
Distr.:  General 
30 November 2022 
 
Original:  English 
 
 
 
 
First regular session 2023 
30 January–3 February 2023, New York 
Item 7 of the provisional agenda  
Country  programmes and related matters 
 
 
 
  Country programme document for Gabon (2023-2027) 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
Chapter  
Page 
I.  UNDP  within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework …………… 
2 
II.  Programme  priorities and partnerships………………………………………………….  ……….… 
4 
III.  Programme  and risk management ……………………………………………….………………… 
8 
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….…………………… 
8 
Annex 
 
Results and resources framework  for Gabon (2023-2027)…………………….…………………… 
10 
 
 
22-27329X (E)    071222 
*2227329* 
 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
I.  UNDP within  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation 
Framework 
1.  Gabon is  an upper-middle-income  country with  a gross  domestic product (GDP)  per 
capita at constant prices of $6,760 in 2021 (against $15,188 in 1976).1 Its population of 2.2 
million is characterized by high urbanization (90 per cent) and the predominance of youth (36 
per cent under age 15 years and 34 per cent aged 15 to 35. With a forest covering 88 per cent 
of the territory,  Gabon is  one of few countries with high  forest cover and low  deforestation. 
It plays a global role in climate regulation with net sequestration of nearly 100 million  tons of 
carbon dioxide (CO2) per year.2 
2.  The implementation of the Emerging Strategic Plan of Gabon  2009-2025), adopted with 
the aim of moving away from oil dependence, began to slow  in 2014. Most macroeconomic 
indicators declined between 2010 and 2021:3  real GDP  growth fell from 5.7 to 1.5 per cent; 
budget revenues fell from 28 to 18 per cent of GDP; public debt soared from 26 to 63 per cent 
of GDP;  and  the balance of payments went from a surplus of 14 per cent to a deficit of -5.4 
per cent of GDP.   
3.  The poverty rate declined  from 42 per cent in  2005 to 33.4 per cent in  20174, but has 
stagnated since then. Despite the large decline in GDP  per capita  over the last three decades, 
the Human Development Index value is still  high (0.706).5 Overall,  Gabon has made progress 
towards the Sustainable Development Goals, especially in the areas of education, health, safe 
drinking water and access to electricity. However, this performance masks spatial inequalities 
between urban and rural areas. Women, youth and local communities living  in  forest areas 
are the most affected. Gender inequality is high  with  a Gender Development Index value of 
0.916 (0.670 for women, against 0.731 for men).6 The unemployment rate is approaching 30 
per cent, up from 25.7 per cent in 20177 and almost 0 per cent in 1980. Half of the unemployed 
are young people aged 15 to 35. This  situation is  exacerbated by the negative impacts of the 
coronavirus disease (COVID-19)  pandemic. 
4.  Despite  progress  in  the  fight  against  corruption  and  public  financial  management, 
governance needs to be more inclusive  and effective. Other challenges include the lack of an 
enabling ecosystem for green economy development and the low capacity to implement sound 
public policies.  The capacities of civil  society organizations (CSOs)  need to be strengthened 
to better exercise citizen control of public policies. 
5.  Gabon is at a crossroads in terms of accelerating its transition from an oil-based economy 
to a green  economy. To that end, the Government adopted its Transformation Acceleration 
Plan 2021-2023 to develop new  growth  engines  (wood processing,  sustainable agriculture, 
ecotourism,  etc.)  and to  renew  the  social  compact (decent jobs,  universal  access to social 
services, etc.). Gabon has reiterated its commitm ent to preserve its natural resources as global 
goods.  It intends  to monetize these ecosystem services  to invest  in  conservation of natural 
resources,  green  economy  and  reduction  of  regional  disparities.  This  commitment also 
addresses  climate  change  adaptation  by  reducing  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  making  its 
economic infrastructure and urban development resilient to climate change. 
6.  Building  on the promises of the African Union Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, the United Nations country team (UNCT)  has adopted the United 
Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  Framework  (UNSDCF)  2023-2027  to 
accompany Gabon in addressing its multifaceted challenges. By 2027, it aims to contribute to 
a significant reduction of poverty and of social and gender inequalities, and to the preservation 
of  ecosystems  to  ensure  the  country's  sustainable development . The  UNSDCF  has  three 
 
1 World Bank: 2022: https://databank.worldbank.org/databases/page/1/orderby/popularity/direction/desc?qterm=Gabon. 
2 Republic of Gabon, National Climate Council, Third National Communication, February 2022. 
3 International Monetary Fund 2022: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/weo-database/2022/April. 
4 Republic of Gabon: Poverty Survey, General Directorate of Statistics, 2017. 
5 UNDP 2021: https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/specific-country-data#/countries/GAB. 
6 UNDP 2021: https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/specific-country-data#/countries/GAB.  
7 Republic of Gabon; National Survey of Employment and Unemployment, Department of Employment. 
2/14 
 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
strategic  priorities:  (a)  promotion of  good  governance; (b)  transition  to  a  green  and blue 
economy; and (c) equal opportunities and inclusion.  Building  on the challenges identified in 
the Common Country Analysis  (lack of economic opportunities  and jobs,  feminization of 
poverty,  regional  disparities),  the  UNSDCF  will  target  the  most  vulnerable  populations, 
mainly women, youth, persons with  disabilities  and local communities in rural areas.  
7.  UNDP  is  well  positioned to contribute to its  implementation based on its  comparative 
advantages and existing  partnerships  with  the Government, development partners  and the 
UNCT. The preparation of the UNSDCF, including  the Common Country Analysis, benefited 
from the analytical work  undertaken by UNDP,  i.e.,  the impact of COVID-19  on progress 
towards  the  Sustainable Development  Goals,  the  socioeconomic  response  to  COVID-19, 
development finance assessment and review of governance. 
8.  The  final  evaluation of  the  previous  country  programme  (2018-2022)  highlighted  its 
relevance and alignment with national priorities  despite the difficult implementation of local 
development plans. This evaluation recommended focusing future interventions o n economic, 
local and environmental governance. Building on these findings,  the new country programme 
2023-2027 will  strengthen the focus on integrated and nature-based solutions to accelerate 
progress  towards the Sustainable Development Goals in Gabon. 
9.  The UNDP  comparative advantages also derive from its being a provider of six integrated 
signature  solutions  (poverty and inequalities,  governance,  resilience,  environm ent, energy, 
gender  equality), facilitating  the co-creation of joint programmes with  key stakeholders to 
accelerate implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. In Gabon, UNDP  has a 
strong  footprint on environmental protection issues  and related themes (green  value chains 
and jobs, sustainable finance, etc.) in which current joint projects will  be strengthened to better 
contribute to the transition to the green  and blue economy. UNDP  is  recognized as a trusted 
adviser on good governance, the first pillar of the UNSDCF.  The country office will  build on 
its track record in supporting four signature solutions and one enabler of the UNDP  Strategic 
Plan, 2022-2025, as described below. 
10.  Environment.  UNDP  supported Gabon  in  the  preparation of  its  third  report  on  its 
nationally determined contribution    under the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC)  and is  a trusted partner of the implementation of the  letter  of 
intent between the Government of Gabon and Central African Forest Initiative (CAFI).  It has 
led initiatives to build the capacity of institutions responsible for forest conservation and land-
use optimization, interventions that will  be critical  to a successful  transition to a green  and 
blue economy, the main pillar of the UNSDCF.   
11.  Governance. UNDP  has played a major role in this area by helping  to build capacity in 
development management, anti-corruption and human rights  protection.  Its  expertise  and 
ability to bring  together multiple actors are seen as assets for the UNSDCF. 
12.  Poverty and inequality. In collaboration with the Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations (FAO),  UNDP  has been testing a pilot operation in two localities aimed at 
strengthening  the  capacities  of  vulnerable  groups  th rough  entrepreneurship,  training 
(productivity,  conservation  and transformation of agricultural  products),  networking  and 
access to finance and digital solutions.   
13.  Gender equality. As part of the above-mentioned solutions initiated in this pilot project, 
UNDP  has developed, with other United Nations agencies, interventions increasing women’s 
participation and contribution.  This  has yielded  interesting  lessons  in  several  areas (cash 
transfers  to  women  entrepreneurs  affected  by  the  COVID-19  pandemic;  targeting 
microenterprises  run  by  women;  capacity-building;  innovation  challenges  and  digital 
solutions led by women entrepreneurs intended to strengthen green value chains, etc.). Other 
interventions focused on advocacy for gender-responsive budgeting.  
14.  Financing for development.  Under the previous country programme, UNDP  played a  
key role  in  strengthening  the partnership with the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP)  and  the  International Monetary Fund  (IMF)  to  develop  the  integrated  national 
3/14 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
financing  framework.  UNDP  supported  several  studies  (green  taxation,  green  private 
investment, green public finance, etc.) and developed national capacities in those areas. This 
experience  will  facilitate  the  co-creation  of  a n  ecosystem  conducive  for  financing  the 
transition  to  a  green  economy in  Gabon.  The  current  collaboration with  United  Nations 
Capital Development Fund (UNCDF)  on digital  finance and financing of microenterprises 
provides  a  strong  base  for  achieving  the  Sustainable Development  Goals,  especially  for 
women and youth-owned businesses. 
15.  UNDP  can also tap into expertise from its Global Policy Network  and Accelerator Labs 
in  other  countries  to  develop  innovative  solutions,  including  digital  solutions,  linkin g 
structural transformation, climate adaptation and sustainable livelihoods. 
II. Programme priorities and partnerships  
16.  The design of the country programme benefited from consultations with all stakeholders 
(Government, CSOs, private sector, development partners, etc.) during the formulation of the 
UNSDCF,  from which  its  vision  and interventions are derived.  The country programme is 
aligned  with  national priorities.  It is  consistent  with  the UNDP  renewed  strategic  offer in 
Africa  and the Climate Promise. UNDP  adopts an integrated approach that acknowledges the 
nexus between green structural transformation, prosperity, conservation of natural resources 
and adaptation to climate change, with good governance as a prerequisite.  
17.  In  line  with  the  Government’s  priorities,  UNDP  will  contribute to  the  UNSDCF  by 
facilitating  transformational change towards a green  economy and conservation of natural 
resources  to create decent jobs and improve living  conditions for the population, especially 
women and youth. To that end, the theory of change suggests that this vision will be realized 
by allowing  all stakeholders to be involved in the formulation and implementation of nature-
based  solutions.  This  process  will  require  that  national  and  decentralized  institutions 
effectively  implement  a  green  structural  transformation  consistent  with  the  country’s 
environmental commitments (conservation of natural resources, adaptation to climate change, 
disaster  risk  reduction).  Special  attention will  be  paid  to  the  promotion of  an ecosystem 
conducive to green  private investment and decent green jobs. Above all,  the prerequisite  of 
this  approach will  be  a  more  inclusive  and  accountable  system  of  governance:  strong 
ownership  and adhesion by national and local institutions, enforcement of transparency and 
anti-corruption standards, timely implementation of structural reforms and empowerment and 
participation of populations, especially women and youth, and civil  society.  
18.  UNDP  will  realize  this  theory of change by leveraging  its  support to  mobilize  actors 
(institutions,  CSOs,  private sector) in favour of structural transformation consistent with  the 
Gabonese  nationally  determined  contributions  and  “green  integrated  national  financing 
framework”.  UNDP  will  continue  to  advocate for  the  commitment of  all  (Government, 
communities,  civil  society,  private sector)  to  the conservation of natural  resources,  green 
economy and resilience  and adaptation to climate change. It will  strengthen its  capacity to 
mobilize resources for the implementation of the country programme and provide innovative 
analysis and solutions to deliver results in these areas. UNDP  will  leverage its support across 
the UNCT  to deliver four signature solutions crucial to the successful implementation of the 
UNSDCF: 
(a)  Governance.  The  expertise  and  ability  of  UNDP  to  bring  together  actors  (public 
institutions,  private sector,  CSOs,  development partners, etc.) will  be an asset in  setting  up 
platforms and co-creating integrated solutions for a n inclusive  and accountable governance 
system, including  effective governance of the integrated national financing framework  and 
the  financing  policies  across  different  areas  (green  economy,  conservation  of  natural 
resources,  nationally  determined  contributions).  UNDP  will  continue  to  advocate  for 
transparency,  anti-corruption  and  participation,  including 
through  the  promotion  of 
digitization to facilitate access to data  and promote the deployment of control mechanisms led 
by communities and civil  society; 
 
4/14 
 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
(b)  Environment.  Based on  its  comparative advantage and leveraging  the strengths  and 
financing  capacities  of  several  partners,  including  national  institutions,  UNDP  has  the 
mandate to facilitate development of nature-based-solutions and risk-informed policies aimed 
at conserving  natural resources  while  accelerating the transition to a green  economy. As  a 
provider of integrated solutions,  UNDP  will  use the protection of the environment as a lever 
to implement the link between growth,  conservation of nature and climate change mitigation 
and adaptation. UNDP will  partner with the Government to update its adaptation strategy and 
prioritize  low-carbon investments, specifically in urban areas; 
(c)  Poverty  and  inequality.  UNDP  will  scale  up  the  results  achieved by  its  pilot  rapid 
financing  facility  project  by  expanding  green  value  chains  to  achieve food  security  and 
conservation of natural resources while reducing dependency on food imports. This will create 
opportunities for “left behind” populations, especially women and youth, by enhancing their 
knowledge  and capacities, providing  innovative and green  solutions  (climate  information, 
digital solutions, social protection for inclusive growth, etc.) and developing climate-resilient  
livelihoods; 
(d)  Gender equality. UNDP  will  work with all partners, including  United Nations agencies 
and the Government, to further promote gender-sensitive policies and budgeting, to accelerate 
women’s economic participation and promote women’s leadership in decision-making in the 
public  and private spheres. Efforts will  focus on potential risks  related to gender  inequality 
such  as  unequal pay and  gender-based  violence,  with  mitigation  measures to  be  defined 
accordingly. 
19.  Building  on these signature solutions and learning from its current work on development 
finance, the programme will focus on an enabling governance framework for the development 
of  nature-based solutions.  This  approach will  make  inclusion,  community participation, 
especially women and youth, the markers of all interventions. 
20.  UNDP  will  facilitate  the  setting-up  of  platforms (delivery  unit  within  the  national 
coordination  council  of  the  Transformation  Acceleration  Plan,  development  financing 
coordination  mechanism,  etc,) 
structural 
reforms/investments aligned with  the Sustainable Development Goals in  collaboration with 
other United Nations agencies, development partners, the private sector, CSOs, universities 
and research  centres.  This  partnership framework will  rely  on South-South and triangular 
cooperation to take advantage of best practices developed elsewhere  and make the African 
Continental Free Trade Area a driver for development.  
to  better  coordinate  and 
implement 
Inclusive governance and institutional accountability 
21.  To  make the green  economy (sustainable  agriculture,  agroforestry, second- and third-
level  wood  processing,  ecotourism,  development  of  non-timber  value  chain)  and  the 
conservation of natural resources  levers  of  development, UNDP  will  respond to  national 
priorities  to accelerate structural transformation by strengthening the capacities of the national 
coordination council of the Transformation Action Plan, located in the Prime Minister's  office, 
and the Ministry  in charge of the economy. Leveraging the respective strengths of the World  
Bank, African Development Bank, IMF and others development partners, UNDP will  focus 
on building  the necessary tools for designing,  coordinating and implementing public policies 
and statistical systems, as well  as analysing risks  to prevent shocks and potential hazards. To 
place this  process  in  a sustainable development  perspective,  UNDP,  in  collaboration with 
UNEP,  will  continue to advocate for the development of synergies  between  the structura l 
transformation  strategy  and  the  nationally  determined  contribution  to  place  climate 
governance in  the  overall  governance  architecture.  Digitization  will  be  an  instrument  to 
modernize  development management, strengthen  monitoring  and evaluation and  facilitate 
access to quality statistical data. 
22.  UNDP  will  collaborate  with  development  partners  (European  Union,  IMF,  United 
Nations agencies, CSOs,  etc.) to make governance systems more inclusive  and accountable. 
UNDP  will  leverage collaboration between the public and private sectors and civil society by 
strengthening the governance mechanism of the integrated national financing framework and 
5/14 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
the capacity of the Ministry in charge of the economy to promote a just and inclusive transition 
to a green economy. The fight against corruption will  be consolidated to improve confidence 
in public institutions and efficiency in  the management of public resources.  In collaboration 
with  CSOs  and communities, digitalization will  be promoted to strengthen the inclusion  of 
non-State actors and make citizen control more effective and reliable. 
23.  Emphasis will  be placed on local governance to reduce geographical disparities in social 
services and economic opportunities by creating jobs in the green economy and conservation 
of natural resources. UNDP  will  work  with  decentralized institutions in  the management of 
integrated  local  development plans  and conduct  a pilot  experiment  on  the  Gabon  Local 
Development Fund. This pilot operation will  be carried out in  Ogooué or Nyanga provinces, 
in  synergy  with  the  Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF)  and the  ministers  in  charge  of 
decentralization  and  environment,  before  being  scaled  up  according  to  partnership 
opportunities. 
24.  Drawing  on lessons from its past, UNDP  will  support a robust financing strategy of the 
transition to a green and low-carbon economy by emphasizing new financing instruments. For 
example, in the case of carbon finance, UNDP  will  support national efforts to access carbon 
finance, especially its readiness to participate in international transactions under Article  6 of 
the Paris  Agreement  and capacities to develop attractive and bankable green projects.  The 
same will  apply to the creation of other instruments (blended finance, green  or blue bonds, 
debt-for-nature swaps, etc.) in collaboration with the UNDP Finance Service  Hub and UNEP. 
Under  the leadership of the Ministry  in  charge of budget, green  taxation will  be promoted 
along with the rationalization of tax expenditures and the prioritization of public investments 
in favour of economic activities approaching carbon neutrality. 
25.  These  efforts  will  be  combined  with  the  removal of  bottlenecks hindering  increased 
domestic resource mobilization, access to climate finance and limiting  the implementation of 
environmental protection projects. Regarding biodiversity  protection,  the country office, in 
partnership with the UNDP  Biodiversity  Financing Initiative, the Government of France and 
the European Union, will  build the capacity of the General Directorate for Environment and 
Nature  Protection  to  analyse  the  policy  and  institutional  environment,  review  public 
expenditures and formulate a financing strategy for biodiversity  protection , under the wider 
integrated national financing strategy.  
26.  UNDP  will  strengthen its  partnership with CAFI to integrate the climate dimension into 
the overall governance framework. It will  forge new partnerships with  vertical funds and the 
private sector to strengthen access to sustainable finance and facilitate the development of 
nature-based solutions intended to better link green growth, conservation of natural resources 
and adaptation to climate change. Joint initiatives will  be undertaken with the United Nations 
Children’s  Fund in public finance (social, green and climate budgeting and monitoring tools) 
and national evaluation policy  with  the  use  of  digital  solutions.  The  same will  apply  to  
collaboration with the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of 
Women (UN-Women)  in  gender-responsive  budgeting,  and the United  Nations Population 
Fund  on data  to better understand the nexus between demographic dynamics, employability 
and the transition to a green economy in a country where  90 per cent  of the population live 
in urban areas.  
Inclusive sustainable  development and resilience 
27.  To  consolidate the country’s commitments under the Paris  Agreement  and UNFCCC, 
UNDP  will  support national policy development and strengthen the capacities of key actors 
including  the  National  Climate  Council,  the  National  Agency  of  National  Parks  and the 
Agricultural  Development  Agency.  In  partnership  with  the  European  Union,  CAFI, 
international  CSOs,  FAO  and  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO),  UNDP  will  focus on testing and scaling-up solutions in  line  with 
the United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and 
Forest  Degradation in Developing  Countries (REDD+).  This  will:  (a) increase the potential 
for  carbon  sequestration  through  increasing  the  size  of  protected  areas,  the  sustainable 
6/14 
 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
management and efficient use of ecosystems and biodiversity and the strengthening of forest 
and biodiversity  monitoring  at the national level;  and (b) reduce future emissions  from the 
agricultural  sector  by  optimizing  land  use  while 
increasing  food  self-sufficiency.  In 
collaboration  with  UNESCO,  CAFI  and  the  GEF,  UNDP  support  will  integrate  urban 
“greening”  (urban parks, tree nurseries,  botanical gardens, education and raising awareness 
of urban populations on nature-based-solutions) and “mini solutions” of compensation and/or 
“low-carbon”  urban  development  (waste  management,  energy, 
transport,  watershed 
protection  and  ecosystem  services  in  peri-urban  areas).  Integrated  land-use  planning 
approaches will  also  be  promoted by  strengthening  data collection  and monitoring  and 
evaluation systems at national and local levels. 
28.  This  conservation of  natural resources  requires  alternative solutions  that  will  support 
local communities to preserve sustainable livelihoods  that are threatened by climate change. 
In collaboration with the GEF and FAO, UNDP  will  strengthen the capacities of decentralized 
institutions, local communities and civil society in the provinces of Lower Ogooue and Lower 
Nyanga with  the creation and sustainable management of community forests,  biodiversity 
protection,  the  development  of  community  businesses  (sustainable  agriculture,  fisheries, 
access to low-carbon  energy)  and alternative value chains linking  economic activities  and 
ecotourism. Special emphasis will  be placed on women and youth -led initiatives in vulnerable 
areas affected by climate changes. 
29.  The transition to a green economy requires an inclusive ecosystem conducive to private 
investment.  In  conjunction  with  partners  (e.g.,  the  World  Bank/International  Finance 
Corporation,  African  Development  Bank, European Union,  private  sector  organizations), 
UNDP  will  facilitate the improvement of the business  environment, develop public-private 
partnerships, promote sustainable finance and develop skills and employability in the green 
economy. Emphasis will  be placed on a productive alliance between the private sector and 
local communities for their participation in green value chains supported by inclusive digital 
solutions. As conservation of natural resources and the green economy are important sources 
of job creation, UNDP  will  develop partnerships with  key players (private sector,  financial 
sector,  business  incubators,  European  Union,  International  Labour  Organization)  and 
capitalize on government initiatives  to prioritize  youth economic empowerment by testing 
and scaling-up local solutions under the Youth-Connekt programme (advocacy, improvement 
of youth skills  and entrepreneurship, especially in the green economy). 
30.  To accompany this dynamic, local and indigenous communities, especially women and 
youth,  will  have  the  capacity  to  participate  in  the  definition,  decision -making  and 
implementation of nature-based solutions  to  ensure  the conservation of natural resources, 
strengthen the quality of ecosystem services  and fight  climate change.  In the provinces of 
Lower  Ogooue  and Lower Nyanga,  there will  be special focus on community participation 
through  the  definition  and implementation of  integrated solutions  for  local  d evelopment, 
including  the creation  of new  value chains  (apiculture,  fisheries  and exploitation of  non-
timber forest products). 
31.  To facilitate the implementation of these initiatives, UNDP will  strengthen its partnership 
with the CAFI, the GEF and FAO. It will  also forge new partnerships with the Green Climate 
Fund, South-South and triangular cooperation, the private sector and UNCDF.   
III. Programme and risk management  
32.  This  country programme document outlines the UNDP  contributions to national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned  to the programme at country level.  Accountabilities  of managers at 
the  country,  regional  and  headqua rter  levels  with  respect  to  country  programmes  are 
prescribed  in  the  organization’s  programme  and operations  policies  and procedures  and 
internal control framework. 
33.  The  programme will  be nationally executed. If necessary, national execution may be 
replaced by  direct  execution for part or  all  of the programme to enable response to  force 
7/14 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
majeure. The harmonized approach to ca sh transfers will  be used in  a coordinated fashion 
with  other  United  Nations  agencies  to  manage  financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and 
classifications for programme and development effectiveness will be charged to the concerned 
projects 
34.  A  strategic  committee chaired  by the Minister  in  charge of the economy will  provide 
overall guidance and directions to the country programme with  the participation of sectoral 
ministries  and  other  actors  involved  in  its  execution  cycle  to  strengthen  capacities  of 
implementing partners and promote programmatic sustainability. 
35.  To  maximize the impact and effectiveness of  programmatic interventions and forge  a 
systemic approach to solutions, the "portfolio" approach will  be progressively  introduced to 
ensure programmatic coherence, avoid siloed approaches and integrate a learning process. To 
accommodate the anticipated portfolio growth, the country office will  adapt its structure to be 
fit for purpose and more agile  and efficient. The office will  monitor financial risks  arising 
from the major increase of the portfolio. It will  apply the UNDP  social and environmental 
standards and accountability mechanism to manage risks. 
36.  One implementation risk is the continued adhesion of national and local institutions and 
communities to programmatic outputs and outcomes. Other risks  relate to possible delays in 
the institutional reforms essential for economic transformation and coherence with the climate 
action plan; and the lack  of an enabling  environment for  mobilizing  th e  private sector  in 
nature-based solutions  and adaptation initiatives.  The  difficult  international environment, 
including  the consequences of the COVID-19  pandemic, could lead donors to reorient their 
priorities  and decrease the resources allocated for basic social services and implementing the 
principle  of leaving no one behind. 
37.  To ensure full  participation and adhesion of national and local institutions, the country 
office will  reinforce an inclusive  process in programme design  and implementation. Regular 
meetings  and consultations will  assess  the level  of engagement of these  stakeholders. An 
inclusive  communication strategy will  help  stakeholders to  identify  themselves in  UNDP 
programmes and results.  
38.  To  ensure  that  delays  in  implementing  institutional  reforms  are  not  hindering  the 
economic transformation, the country office will  strengthen advocacy and provide technical 
assistance to  ensure  that necessary policies  are effectively developed and approved at the 
various decision-making levels. 
39.  To  mobilize  the private sector,  the  country office  is  counting  on  the high  investment 
return of climate finance and the growing importance of environmental, social and governance 
issues to raise the interests of key players in the sector. The country office partnership strategy 
will  identify  key  private  sector  companies and other  donors  and  strengthen  partnerships 
through involvement in programme governance bodies and development of joint projects.  
IV.  Monitoring and evaluation 
40.  In the context of the periodic review and analysis of the country programme, the outputs 
of which are derived from the UNSDCF,  UNDP  will  rely primarily on the national statistical 
information system  to  produce,  update and disseminate  the  data needed  to  mon itor  the 
outcome indicators. In collaboration with other United Nations agencies, UNDP will  promote 
new  solutions  in  the  areas of  data collection  and management, including  natural capital 
accounting and green budgeting. 
41.  The implementation of the country programme and progress towards the expected results 
will  be regularly  monitored through coordination meetings,  semi-annual and annual reviews  
and a midterm evaluation directly linked to the UNSDCF  institutional review  process. UNDP 
will  use  indicator  data, progress  reports,  information from  field  visits  and other  analysis 
conducted to inform the regular reviews  and inform decision-making. The data, information 
and knowledge generated through these reviews  and evaluations will  inform the monitoring 
and evaluation system of the UNSDCF.  In the context of results-based management, UNDP 
8/14 
 
22-27329 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
will  organize regular  field meetings with  beneficiaries and other stakeholders to solicit  their 
feedback and maximize the use of digital  solutions  to  collect  data and inform appropriate 
decision-making processes. 
42.  Based on the UNDP  evaluation policy, an evaluation plan has been prepared and includes 
country programme, outcome, project and thematic evaluations . Evaluations will be carried 
out in accordance with UNDP  rules  and regulations. These exercises will  aim to improve the 
quality of  programme execution through  learning  and adaptation, with  adjustments made 
when  necessary  to the  theory  of change and the  results  and resources  framework  after a 
midterm review.  
43.  UNDP  will  allocate at least 15 per cent of the budget to invest in  gender  equality and 
women's empowerment. It will  use its gender marker to track programmatic contributions and 
results in these areas. 
9/14 
22-27329 
 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for Gabon (2023-2027) 
NATIONAL PRIORITIES OR GOALS: Improving governance and transparency in the public sector, strengthening financing instruments for sustainable development, economic transformation 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP 1 : By 2027, the legal and institutional framework is strengthened, and institutions are more accountable, transparent and 
efficient, to ensure orthodox and inclusive governance and sustainable and equitable development in line with national and international commitments made by the country (All 17 SDGs) 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 1: Structural transformation accelerated, particularly green, inclusive, and digital transitions  
COOPERATION 
FRAMEWORK OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), BASELINES, 
TARGET(S) 
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF DATA 
COLLECTION, AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS 
(including indicators, and baselines targets) 
MAJOR PARTNERS /  
PARNERSHIPS FRAMEWORKS 
ESTIMATED COST 
BY OUTCOME ($) 
Indicator 1.a: Corruption 
Perception Index  
Baseline: 31 
Target: 35 
Data Source: Transparency 
International 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: UNDP 
Output 1.1: Public institutions – Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Economy - 
have strengthened capacity to manage, monitor and evaluate economic and green 
structural transformation, consistent with nationally determined contributions and 
to diversify their financing. 
National Climate Council, Prime 
Minister’s office, Ministries in charge 
of Economy; Environment; Budget; 
Anti-corruption; Interior; 
Decentralization; Digital Economy; 
Justice; Youth 
Regular: $0.768M 
 
Other: $13.49M 
 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.1: Number of multi-stakeholder (government, private sector, civil 
society) collaborative/digital platforms established that: (a) are aligned to 
national priorities with the SDGs and financing framework; (b) ensure alignment 
between structural transformation reforms/investment and action plan; (c) ensure 
monitoring and evaluation in accordance with national policy 
 
 
Indicator 1. b: Mo. Ibrahim 
Governance Index  
Baseline: 47.7 
Target: 50 
Data Source: Mo Ibrahim 
Foundation 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: UNDP 
 
 
National Agency of National Parks  
 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 3 
Source: Ministries in charge of economy; anti-corruption; environment 
Frequency: Annual 
National Assembly 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicator 1. c Proportion of 
women in management positions 
in public administration 
Data Source: Activity report of the 
Observatory of Women's Rights 
Statistical Yearbook (General 
Directorate of Statistics) General 
Census of Population and Housing 
Frequency: annual  
Responsibility: UN-Women 
City Halls, Departmental Councils, 
 
Civil society organizations  
Resident Coordinator’s office, 
UNICEF, UNESCO 
 
Baseline: 38.5% 
Target: 50% 
Indicator 1.1.2: Volume of resources mobilized by the Government through new 
sustainable and innovative green finance instruments. 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: $500 million 
Source: Ministry of Economy /   Gabonese Strategic Investment Fund  
Frequency: Annual 
 
 
Private Sector: banks, Gabonese 
Strategic Investment Fund 
 
 
Indicator 1.1.3: Proportion of national budget allocated to the green economy 
and natural resource conservation through implementation of the integrated 
national financing framework 
Baseline (2022): 4.45% 
Target: 15% 
Source: Ministry of Budget  
Frequency: Annual 
10/14   
22-27329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
Output 1.2: Civil society and the population, particularly women and young 
people, at the national and local levels participate effectively in public decision-
making and effective citizen control with the help of digital tools. 
 
Indicator 1.2.1: Number of policies and strategies to protect and promote: (a) 
inclusive spaces, mechanisms and capacities for public dialogue; (b) access to 
reliable information on issues of public concern (Strategic Plan indicator 2.4.5) 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: (a) 3; (b) 2 
Source: Ministry of Anti-Corruption  
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.2.2: Percentage of women and youth elected in parliament. 
Baseline (2018): women: 16.2%; youth: 0% 
Target: women: 25%; youth: 15% 
Source: National Assembly,  
Frequency: five-yearly 
 
Indicator 1.2.3: Number of partnerships with women-led civil society 
organizations and other bodies and networks to advance women’s leadership and 
participation and gender equality  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 3 
Source: Ministry of Health and Social Affairs  
Frequency: Annual 
Output 1.3: Legal and institutional systems to fight corruption and promote 
transparency in natural resource management are in place to deliver solutions and 
accelerate SDG achievements 
 
Indicator 1.3.1: Number of digital solutions developed to fight corruption  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 5 
Source: Ministry of Anti-Corruption 
Frequency: Annual  
 
Indicator 1.3.2: Number of public and private sector structures, including in 
natural resource management, effectively implementing anti-corruption measures 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 10 
Source: Ministry of Anti-Corruption Frequency: Annual 
Output 1.4: The legal, institutional and operational framework for 
decentralization is finalized, implemented and financed in part through 
sustainable finance, to accelerate local development and the achievement of the 
SDGs at the local level.  
 
Indicator 1.4.1: Number of municipalities that (a) develop, (b)implement and (c) 
finance local development, including through sustainable finance to advance the 
achievement of SDGs at the local level 
11/14 
22-27329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: (a) 10 (b) 5 (c) 2  
Source: Gabonese Strategic Investment Fund  
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.4.2: Proportion of national budget allocated to Provinces for 
localization of the SDGs 
Baseline (2022):0 
Target:2% 
Source: Ministry of Budget 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 1.4.3: Number of local development policies on green economy and 
natural resource conservation, developed with civil society and local 
communities. 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 10 
Source: Ministry of Interior 
Frequency: Annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: Rethinking the social model, promoting equality and inclusion, fighting poverty and inequality 
COOPERATION FRAMEWORK (OR EQUIVALENT) OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP # 2:  By 2027, populations, especially youth and women, participate in the sustainable management of natural resources and 
benefit from the fruits of a controlled transition to a green and blue economy in an environment more resilient to climate ch ange (SDGs 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17) 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME 3: Resilience built to respond to systemic uncertainty and risk  
Indicator 2. a: CO2 emission and 
Absorption (metric tons per capita) 
Data source (indicators 2.a, 2.b, 
2.c): Directorate of Equal 
Opportunities and Gender, General 
Directorate of Prospective, General 
Directorate of Local Authorities, 
National Agency of National Parks 
. 
Frequency (indicators 2.a, 2.b, 
2.c): Annual 
Responsibility (indicators 2.a, 
2.b, 2.c): Ministries in charge of 
Economy; Anti-corruption;  
Interior, General Directorate of 
Environment. 
Output 2.1: Institutions at the national and local levels and local communities, 
including youth and women, define, decide on and implement nature-based 
solutions to manage and conserve natural resources. 
National Climate Council, Prime 
Minister’s office, Ministries in charge 
of: Economy; Environment; Budget; 
Digital Economy; Small and Medium 
Enterprises; Agriculture 
Regular: 0M 
Other: $45.21M 
Baseline: tbc 
Target: tbc 
 
Indicator 2.1.1: Number of implementing legislations to ensure the participation 
of local communities, including a strong representation of women and youth, in 
the transparent and sustainable management of natural resources 
 
Indicator 2. b: Area of forest 
managed sustainably/under 
independent certification 
 
 
Baseline (2022):0 
Target:3 
Source : Direction Générale Environnement et Protection de la Nature 
Frequency: Annual 
Civil society organizations  
Baseline: 81.9% 
Target: 100% 
 
UNDP Climate Forest Unit, FAO, 
UNESCO, United Nations Office for 
Drugs and Crime, Resident 
Coordinator’s office 
 
Indicator 2. c: Number of sites of 
importance for terrestrial 
biodiversity that are in protected 
areas 
 
Indicator 2.1.2: Level of implementation of an effective mechanism for natural 
capital accounting system 
 
Baseline (2022):0 
Target:1 
Rating scale: 0-Not implemented, 1-Work started, 2-Work in progress, 3-Work 
almost complete, 4-In place and functioning 
Source: Ministry of Budget 
Frequency: Annual 
Private sector including business 
incubators 
Data source (indicators 2.d and 
2.e): Directorate of SMEs, General 
Directorate of Foresight, National 
Agency of National Parks, General 
Directorate of Environment, 
Baseline: tbc 
Target: tbc 
 
Indicator 2.d: Unemployment rate 
by gender, age and disability status 
12/14   
22-27329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
Baseline: W-28.5%; M-14.4%, 
Youth-44.7% 
Target: tbc  
National Office of Employment, 
National Agency of Investment 
Promotion, 
Frequency (indicators 2.d and 
2.e): Annual 
Responsibility (indicators 2.d and 
2.e):  Ministries in charge of 
Economy; Small and Medium 
Enterprises; Environment  
Output 2.2: Institutions at the national and local levels, local communities, 
including youth and women, and civil society develop innovative and integrated 
solutions to pursue sustainable livelihoods adapted to climate change. 
 
 
Indicator 2.e: Labour force 
participation rate for persons aged 
15+, by gender (and race/ethnicity 
where available) 
Baseline: tbc 
Target: tbc 
Indicator 2.2.1: Number of women and men from vulnerable areas directly 
benefiting from initiatives (including employment) for the protection and 
sustainable management of natural resources (forest, biodiversity) (based on 
Strategic Plan indicator 4.1.1) 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 
Men:1,000 
Women:1,500 
 
Source: National Agency of National Parks.   
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.2.2: Surface of newly developed protected areas (in hectares)  
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 600,000 ha 
Source: National Agency of National Parks 
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.2.3: To what extent the country has early warning and preparedness 
measures in place to manage impact of disasters, pandemics and other shocks 
(Strategic Plan indicator 3.1.2) 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: 3 
Rating scale: 0-Not in place, 1-Work started, 2-Work in progress, 3-Work 
almost complete, 4-In place 
Source: General Directorate for Risks and Natural Disasters  
Frequency: Annual 
Output 2.3: Enabling ecosystem in place for private investments and job 
creation in green economy, particularly for women and youth. 
 
Indicator 2.3.1: Level of implementation of a legal framework conducive to 
green private investment, especially for women- and youth-led MSMEs. 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target:3 
Rating scale: 0-no legal framework;1-Legal framework being developed; 2-
Legal framework in place;3-Legal framework implemented  
Source:  National Agency of Investment Promotion 
Frequency: Every 2 years 
 
Indicator 2.3.2: Number of jobs created for youth and women in the green 
economy 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target:  
Women 18-35: 1,500 
Men 18-35: 1,500 
13/14 
22-27329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DP/DCP/GAB/4 
 
 
Women >35: 2,000 
Source: National Office for Employment  
Frequency: Annual 
 
Indicator 2.3.3: Number of (a) businesses and (b)communities engaged in 
sustainable food systems and circular economy including through new 
technologies 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target: a:30; b: 50 
Source: General Directorate for Agriculture 
Frequency: Annual 
 
14/14   
22-27329 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
