A/78/201  United Nations  General Assembly        Distr.: General  17 July 2023
Original: English    Seventy-eighth session  Item 19 (h) of the provisional
agenda*  Sustainable development          Ensuring access to affordable,
reliable, sustainable and    modern energy for all        Report of the
Secretary-General            Summary  Submitted pursuant to General Assembly
resolution  77/170, the present report  provides  an  overview  of  the
progress  made  towards  ensuring  access  to  affordable,  reliable,
sustainable and modern energy for all. The report also provides an overview  of
follow-up to the high-level dialogue on energy and the United Nations Decade of
Sustainable  Energy  for  All  (2014–2024),  including  relevant  efforts  to
inform  the  review  of  Sustainable  Development  Goal  7  at  the  high-level
political  forum  on  sustainable development and the Sustainable Development
Goals Summit, as well as  a  global  stocktaking  of  Goal  7  to  be  held  in
2024  marking  the  completion  of  the  Decade.  It  also  provides  an  update
on  UN-Energy  efforts  towards  strengthening  coherence and coordination
within the United Nations system in support of Goal 7.               *
A/78/150.    23-13986 (E)    150823  *2313986*      A/78/201      I.
Introduction        1.  The present report is submitted pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 77/170,  in  which  the  Assembly  requested  the
Secretary-General  to  submit,  at  its  seventy- eighth session, a report on
the implementation of the resolution, including activities  carried out to mark
the United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All.       II.  Ensuring
access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and    modern energy for all at the
midpoint of the 2030 Agenda  for Sustainable Development      2.  With only
seven years left to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, the  promise of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is in peril. The fragility of  past
hard-earned  progress  has  been  compounded  by  the  climate  crisis,
conflict,  a  gloomy global economic outlook and the lingering effects of the
coronavirus disease  (COVID-19) pandemic.  3.  The  climate  crisis  is
worsening  as  greenhouse  gas  emissions  continue  to  rise.  Global
temperatures  are  likely  to  reach  the  critical  1.5°C  tipping   point
above  pre-industrial  levels  by  2035.  Catastrophic  and  intensifying  heat
waves,  droughts,  flooding and wildfires have become far too frequent.   4.
Energy  is  an  essential  ingredient  for  getting  the  world  back  on  track
towards  meeting the Goals and the objectives of the Paris Agreement on climate
change. The  review of Goal 7 at the 2023 high-level political forum on
sustainable development  has underscored  that  although  it is  currently  off
track,  it  is  still  possible  to  achieve  Goal 7 by 2030 through rapid
acceleration of global efforts in the next 7.5 years.   5.  Efforts must be
scaled up and accelerated to ensure effective follow -up to the  high-level
dialogue  on  energy  held  in  2021  and  the  implementation  of  the  United
Nations  Decade  of  Sustainable  Energy  for All  (2014–2024)  to  achieve
Goal  7  by  2030.      III.  Progress towards ensuring access to affordable,
reliable,    sustainable and modern energy for all1      A.  Global overview
6.  Despite  some  progress  on  some  of  the  indicators,  the  current  pace
is  not  adequate  for  achieving  any  of the 2030  targets. Among the  major
economic  factors  impeding the realization of Goal 7 globally are the uncertain
macroeconomic outlook,  high levels of inflation, currency fluctuations, debt
distress in a growing number of  countries,  lack  of  financing,  supply  chain
bottlenecks,  tighter  fiscal  circumstances  and soaring prices for materials.
7.  Although  certain  policy  responses  to  the  global  energy  crisis
appear  likely  to  improve  the  outlook  for  renewables  and  energy
eﬃciency,  oth er  necessary  policy  actions,  as  well  as financial flows,
continue to  lag  behind. In particular,  challenges  __________________  1  The
present report draws on the following documents: the policy briefs in support of
the 2023  high-level political forum, compiled by the technical advisory group
on Goal 7; and  Tracking  SDG7: The Energy Progress Report (2023), a joint
report of the International Energy Agency, the  International Renewable Energy
Agency, the Statistics Division of the Department of Economic  and Social
Affairs, the World Bank Group and the World Health Organization .    23-13986
2/16    A/78/201      concern  the  lack  of  universal  access  to  electricity
and  clean  cooking  in  developing  economies, with projections indicating that
Goal 7 will not be re ached by 2030.      Access to electricity      Target  7.1
on  ensuring  universal  access  to  affordable,  reliable  and  modern  8.
energy services is off track, with an estimated 675 million people still without
access  to electricity.  The share of the global population with access to
electricity increased from 84  9.  per cent in 2010 to 91 per cent in 2021, with
1.1 billion people gaining access during  that  period. After  accounting  for
population  growth,  the  global  population  without  access to electricity
fell from about 1.1 billion in 2010 to 675 million in 2021. In the  period
2019–2021,  the  number  of  people  with  access  increased  by  114  million
per  year, fewer than the 129 million who had access each year  between 2010 and
2019.  10.  The world’s electricity access deficit is primarily concentrated in
sub -Saharan  Africa, where three quarters of the population is without access.
Access to electricity  remains a major barrier to socioeconomic development in
sub -Saharan Africa, home  to more than 80 per cent of the global population
lacking access to electricity in 2021.  Despite steady progress in the access
rate over the past decade, the number of people  without access in the region
remained stagnant because of population growth, leaving  567 million without
access in 2021.   11.  To close the electricity access gap, it has been
estimated that the annual rate of  growth in electrification would have to rise
to 1 percentage point per year from 2021  onwards – almost twice the current
pace of 0.6 percentage points in the period 2019– 2021.  If no additional
efforts and measures are put in place, some 660 million people,  12.  mostly in
sub-Saharan Africa, will still remain without access in 2030.        Access to
clean cooking solutions       13.  In 2021, 71 per cent of the global population
had access to clean cooking fuels  and  technologies,  an  increase  of  14
points  since  2010.  Despite  the  progress,  some  2.3 billion people still
use polluting fuels and technologies for most of their cooking.    14.  The
global access rate has been improving slowly over the past few decades. If
current  trends  continue,  only  about  77  per  cent  of  the  global
population  will  have  access to clean cooking fuels and technologies by 2030.
That would leave 1.9 billion  people continuing to rely on traditional and
inefficient stoves paired with solid fuels  (wood, charcoal, coal, crop waste)
and kerosene for cooking.   15.  The increase in access during the period
2010–2021 was led by Brazil, China,  India, Indonesia and Pakistan, where the
combined access  rate rose from 49 per cent  in 2010 to 77 per cent in 2021. The
global access rate for all other low - and middle- income countries has remained
stagnant (from 48 per cent in 2010 to 52 per cent in  2021).  16.  The access
deficit has decreased consistently in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia  since
2000,  and  in  Central  Asia  and  Southern  Asia  since  2010.  However,  in
sub-Saharan Africa, there  has  been a  clear  upward  trend  in the  deficit,
as  access to  clean cooking has failed to keep pace with growing populations.
17.  Owing  to the ongoing impact of the  COVID-19 pandemic  and  soaring
energy  prices,  the  International  Energy  Agency  estimates  that  100
million  people  who  recently transitioned to clean cooking may revert to using
traditional biomass. Unless  eﬀorts  are  rapidly  scaled  up  now,  polluting
cooking  fuels  and  technologies  will  23-13986  3/16    A/78/201
continue  to  claim  millions  of  lives  each  year  while  perpetuating
gender  inequality,  deforestation and climate change.   18.  To  achieve  the
goal  of  universal  access  to  clean  fuels  and  technologies   for  cooking,
it  is  estimated  that  access  gains  need  to  increase  by  at  least  3
per  cent  annually until 2030, compared with 1 per cent over the 2010 –2021
period.      Renewable energy       19.  The  share  of  renewable  energy  in
total  final  energy  consumption  reach ed  19.1 per  cent  in  2020,  owing
to  overall  reduced  energy  consumption  during  the  COVID-19  pandemic.
However,  it  was  not  expected  that  such  a  notable  increase  would  be
repeated  in  2021,  as  total  final  energy  consumption  was  anticipated  to
rebound  close  to  pre-pandemic  levels  with  the  recovery  of  economic
activity  and  restrictions of movements being lifted in most countries.   20.
The largest increase in the share of renewables has been for electricity,
reaching  28.2  per  cent  in  total,  while  the  transport  and  heat  sectors
have  had  much  slower  progress, or none at all.  21.  Renewable energy
consumed for heating increased 0.9 per cent to 42 exajoules (EJ)  in 2020.
Unfortunately, traditional uses of biomass represented almost 60 per cent of
that growth, increasing the scale of negative health, social and environmental
impacts  from  the  lack  of  access  to  clean  cooking. The  increase   was
mainly  caused  by  such  factors during the COVID-19 pandemic as disrupted
deliveries of clean cooking fuel  and imposed working restrictions, reducing the
ability of consumers to afford modern  fuels and pushing many back to the
traditional uses of biomass.    22.  The transport sector, affected as it was by
policy responses to the pandemic, saw  a 14 per cent (-16.6 EJ) decline in
global final energy consumption in 2020. Biofuel  consumption  for  transport
declined  together  with  oil  consumption,  leading  to  the  largest
reduction  among  renewable  energy  source  consumption  between  2019  and
2020,  at  an  estimated  4  per  cent  (-0.16  EJ).  This  was  the  first
reduction  in  annual  production in two decades. This brings the total share of
renewable energy to 4 per  cent (up from 3.6 per cent in 2019) for this sector,
only 0.9 percentage points higher  than in 2015.  23.  Enhancing renewables-
based electricity supply in developing countries deserves  particular
attention.  Positively,  developing  countries  saw  a  record -breaking
renewable  capacity  growth  in  2021  (+9.8  per  cent  year-on-year),  with
cumulative  installations  reaching  268  watts  per  capita.  However,  this
growth  is  unevenly  distributed, and further action is required, especially in
the least developed countries.  24.  If  the  world  is  to  be  on  track  to
limit  the  temperature  rise  to  less  than  1.5°C  throughout the century,
the share of renewables must reach 33 to 38 per cent of global  total final
energy consumption by 2030. In the power sector, renewables would need  to
account for 60 to 65 per cent of electricity generation.       Energy efficiency
25.  Target 7.3 calls for doubling the global rate of improvement in energy
efficiency  over the average rate during the period 1990–2010 – which means
improving energy  intensity by 2.6 per cent per year between 2010 and 2030.
However, progress between  2010 and 2020 averaged only 1.8 per cent. To make up
lost ground, improvement in  energy  intensity  must  now  exceed  3.4 per  cent
globally from  2020 to 2030  – twice  the rate achieved in the past decade. An
even greater improvement would be needed  to be on track to limit the end-of-
century temperature rise to less than 1.5°C.  23-13986  4/16    A/78/201
26.  Primary  energy  intensity  improved  at  a  consistently  higher  rate
over  the  past  decade (2010–2020) than it did in the previous two (1990–2010).
However, the rate  of  improvement  declined  to  0.6  per  cent  in  2020,
largely  because  of  COVID-19- induced lockdowns and travel restrictions and
the radical shifts in the global economy  that accompanied the initial lockdowns
in that year. This makes 2020 the worst year  for  energy  intensity
improvement  since  the  global  financial  crisis,  with  worldwide  energy
intensity declining to 4.63 megajoules (MJ) per (2017) dollar.   27.  Doubling
the  global  rate  of  energy  intensity  improvement  by  2030  and  thus
achieving Target 7.3 is key as it also supports the other targets under Goal 7.
Between  2010  and  2020  the  average  annual  rate  of  improvement  in
global  primary  energy  intensity  was  1.8  per  cent.  Although  this  was
better  than  the  rate  of  1.2  per  cent  between 1990 and 2010, it is well
below the Target 7.3 aim of 2.65 per c ent.  28.  Annual improvement until 2030
will now need to average 3.4 per cent to meet  Target  7.3.  Estimates  for
2021  point  to  a  continued  lack  of  progress  in  intensity  improvement
due to the COVID-19 crisis, although early estimates for 2022 suggest  a
rebound  to  higher  levels  of  improvement,  aided  by  renewed  policy
support  and  urgency in the wake of the energy crisis.       Means of
implementation       29.  Reaching  Goal  7  and  net-zero  emissions  requires
an  urgent  and  steep  rise  in  clean  energy  investment  and  finance.
Worldwide  investment  in  clean  energy  and  energy efficiency will need to
triple over the next 10 years to put the world on track  for net-zero emissions
by 2050, with a priority focus on the needs of the world’s least  developed
countries  and  universal  access  to  electricity  and  clean  cooking  by
2030.  This  is  a  massive  opportunity  and  one  that  requires  concerted
policy  interventions,  public finance and private investments to be realized at
the required scale.    30.  Directing  international  public  financial  flows
towards  clean  energy  solutions  has become more difficult since 2020 because
of the reallocation of public resources  to recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
31.  International public financial flows to developing countries in support of
clean  energy amounted to $10.8 billion in 2021, an 11.4 per cent drop from
2020, 35 per  cent less than the 2010–2019 average and only about 40 per cent of
the 2017 peak of  $26.4  billion.  The  downward  trend  in  public  investments
is  ex pected  to  have  continued in 2022; data released in 2023 will provide a
clearer picture of the impacts  of the energy crisis in Europe sparked by the
war in Ukraine on public financial flows.  32.  Financial commitments continued
to shift from hydropower to  solar energy in  2021. Solar energy attracted the
largest share of  public financial flows (43 per cent),  followed by
multiple/other renewables (33 per cent) and hydropower (16 per cent);  wind  and
geothermal  energy  received  less  than  10  per  cent  of  total  flows.
After  focusing  mainly  on  hydropower  before  2010,  a  growing  share  of
public  financial  flows  have  been  targeted  at  supporting  solar
technology,  including  through  multipurpose green funds and support for
infrastructure.  33.  Public financial flows are becoming marginally more widely
distributed among  countries, although they remain heavily concentrated. During
2010 –2019 period, 36  countries received 80 per cent of all commitments; over
the longer 2010–2021 period,  the number increases slightly to 38, including
commitments to unspecified countries  without  allocations  and  unspecified
subregions  without  allocations.  The  share  of  countries that received no
commitments fell to less than 20 per cent in 2021; over the  past  decade,  only
three  countries  received  no  international  commitments.  Flows  to  the
countries  most  in  need  (least  developed  countries,  landlocked  developing
23-13986  5/16    A/78/201      countries  and  small  island  developing
States)  fell  in  2021,  and  these  countries  had  lower flows in absolute
terms than others.  34.  Even as international public financial flows declined
by 13 per cent in 2020 and  by  another  11.4  per  cent  in  2021,  several
regions  saw  increases  in  2021.  In  2021,  North  America  and  Europe
received  81  per  cent  more  funding  than  in  2020  (an  increase of $180
million); flows to sub-Saharan Africa rose by 45 per cent (an increase  of
$1,213 million); and flows to East Asia and South-East Asia increased 23 per
cent  (an increase of $251 million). In other regions, flows declined. Latin
America and the  Caribbean experienced the largest drop in international public
finance, at 62 per cent  (a decline of $2,295 million). Flows declined by about
59 per cent ($582 million) in  West Asia and North Africa, 42 per cent ($9
million) in Oceania, and 8 per cent ($232  million) in Central Asia and South
Asia.  35.  Financial  commitments to developing  countries  must  increase,
given  the  need  to scale up overall renewable energy investments substantially
in order to reach the  targets  for  Goal  7.  Higher  public  financial  flows
will  surely  be  needed  in  the  short  term,  in  light  of  COVID-19  and
the  effects  of  the  armed  conflict  in  Ukraine,  particularly  with  the
least  developed  countries  falling  furthest  behind  in  reaching  Goal 7.
36.  The share of debt instruments in international public finance declined
steadily  after 2018; in 2021, it stood at two thirds of public financial flows,
down from nearly  90 per cent in 2018. The share of grants, equity and
guarantees increased. The increase  in grants is a boon to recipient countries,
as these instruments do not carry the burden  of  future  repayment. At  the
same  time,  the  absolute  decline  in  loan  flows  –  which  typically make
up a substantial portion of public financial flows for projects – makes  it
harder to secure finance for both larger, commercially viable projects and start
-ups  with limited resources.   37.  With the limited availability of public
resources, their strategic use to m obilize  in  additional  private  capital
is  key,  especially  in  sectors  and  regions  that  private  investors
perceive  as  too  risky  to  invest  in.  The  predictability  and  reliability
of  policies and regulations are a vital consideration for attracting investors,
as it reduces  risks related to policy reversals or renegotiations. In this
regard, governments have a  key  role  to  play  in  the  establishment  of
stable  and  coherent  policy  and  regulatory  frameworks.  38.  There  are
significant  and  persistent  policy,  technology,  f inance-related  and
social challenges to energy innovation, technology development and deployment,
and  data improvement. Existing technologies are underdeployed, and
approximately half  of the technologies necessary to meet the 2050 target are
still in the e arly stages of  development and demonstration.   39.  Countries
need  well-trained  and  skilled  people  to  work  on  energy  projects  in
order to meet their renewable energy ambitions. Support for educational and
training  programmes, including  digital capacity programmes on sustainable
energy,  to build  local knowledge and capacity, and promote renewable energy
projects are  critical, as  are  scaling  up  capacity-building  efforts,
including  for  enabling  frameworks,  technology cooperation, investment
measures, the transfer of technical know-how and  staff training activities.
B.  Regional overview         40.  As  in  previous  years,  rates  of  progress
vary  significantly  across  regions,  with  some  regions  making  substantial
gains  towards  some  targets,  while  in  other  cases  progress is slowing or
even moving backwards.   23-13986  6/16    A/78/201          Africa       41.
The  constraints  on  African  economies  and  communities  brought  on  by  the
continent’s  persistent  energy  access  deficit  have  recently  been  made
worse  by  the  global  energy  crisis.  The  crisis,  in  turn,  has  been
brought  on  by  the  COVID -19  pandemic, the war in Ukraine and the growing
impact of climate change.  42.  A massive energy access deficit on the continent
must be closed urgently and at  scale  if  the  Goals  are  to  be  achieved.
The  continent  has  an  abundance  of  energy  resources,  both  renewable  and
non-renewable,  yet  public  resources  are  highly  constrained. At  the  same
time,  there  are  low  levels  of  private  sector  investment  in  Africa’s
energy  transformation  and  limited  support  for  recovery  from  financial
hardship.   43.  The  continent  has  made  progress  towards  universal  energy
access  in  recent  years.  Electricity  coverage  increased  from  44  to  56
per  cent  of  the  continent’s  population between 2010 and 2020. However, many
African countries are not on track  to achieve the Goal 7 target of ensuring
everyone can access affordable, dependable,  sustainable  and  modern  energy.
Access  to  reasonably  priced  and  reliable  modern  energy services is also a
crucial prerequisite for advancing many of the Goals.  44.  The world’s
electricity access deficit is primarily concentrated in sub -Saharan  Africa,
where  three  quarters  of  the  population  is  without  access.  In  sub
-Saharan  Africa, the number of people without access was roughly the same in
2021 as in 2010.    45.  Between  2010  and  2020,  the  number  of  Africans
needing  access  to  clean  cooking  solutions  increased  by  170  million  to
about  937  million  due  to  population  growth and insufficient investment in
clean cooking options.    46.  Meanwhile, renewables’ penetration is still slow,
and as a result, has a limited  impact  on  the  African  population,  even
though  almost  all  countries  in  the  region  present great opportunities for
investments in the renewable energy sector. Africa has  the lowest share of
modern renewable energy compared to other continents and the  world,  at 7.6
per  cent  of  total final energy  consumption.  Mea nwhile, total  installed
renewable power capacity (including hydropower) rose by 107 per cent between
2010  and 2020, from 27 gigawatts (GW) to 56 GW.  47.  Due  to  the  continent’s
heavy  reliance  on  the  usage  of  solid  biomass,  the  proportion of
renewable energy in total energy consumption increased slightly, from  56.6 per
cent to 57.1 per cent, between 2010 and 2020.      Arab region       48.  While
the Arab region has made progress recently towards achieving the Goal  7
targets, urgent efforts are still vital if these goals are to be achieved by
2030.   49.  The region retains an overwhelming reliance on fossil fuels, even
though some  Arab countries have made substantial progress on utility-scale
renewable electricity  generation. Many of these world-leading projects are set
to come online in 2023, too,  while  five  Arab  countries  have  also  pledged
to  achieve  economy -wide  net-zero  emissions by 2050 or 2060.   50.  Access
to  electricity  in  the Arab  region  was  almost  91  per  cent  in  2021,
with  many  countries  having  reached  100  per  cent.  Nevertheless,
conflict,  political  instability  and  utility  sector  mismanagement  left
nearly  42  million  people  without  electricity access that year, across the
region. Rural areas suffered the largest deficits.  In  these,  only  83  per
cent  of  the  population  had  access  to  electricity,  compared  to  98 per
cent  in  urban  areas. The  rural-urban  divide  was  most  prominent  in  the
least  23-13986  7/16    A/78/201      developed countries of the region. In
these, urban electricity access averaged 84.5 per  cent, while in rural areas,
it averaged only 52 per cent.  51.  While 88 per cent of the population has
access to clean fuels and technology for  cooking in the Arab region, there are
large subregional disparities. In 2021, 52 million  people in the Arab region
did not have access to clean cooking, a slight increase from  2019. About  88
per  cent  of  these  people  lived  in  Somalia,  the  Sudan  and  Yemen.
Djibouti and Somalia were the countries with the highest share of their
populations  lacking access to clean fuels, at more than 90 per cent.   52.
With gross domestic product (GDP) calculated according to a 2017 purchasing
power parity baseline, energy intensity in the Arab region increased from 5.11
MJ per  dollar in 2019 to 5.17 MJ per dollar in 2020. Over the past decade,
however, energy  intensity has decreased, having stood at 5.2 MJ per dollar in
2010. This trend was not  uniform, however: while the Gulf Cooperation Council
and Mashreq subregions saw  this decline in energy intensity, the Maghreb and
least developed countries in the Arab  subregions saw intensity increase over
the same period.   In the Arab region, renewable energy penetration rates
continued to lag behind  53.  other  geographical  areas.  Only  5.1  per  cent
of  the  region’s  total  final  energy  consumption was generated by renewables
in 2020, with this mainly accounted for by  solid biofuels. Three countries
(Egypt, Somalia and Sudan) accounted for 72 per cent  of the region’s renewable
energy consumption in 2020.    54.  Total  installed  renewable  electricity
capacity  in  the Arab  region  has  roughly   doubled  over the  past  decade,
reaching  a little over  22  GW  in 2021.  In 2020,  solar  and wind energy
accounted for nearly 12 per cent of the region’s renewable energy  consumption,
up  from  11  per  cent  in  2019,  with  solar  being  the  fastest -growing
renewable source for power generation.      Asia and the Pacific      55.
Despite significant progress, the pace of transition to clean energy is uneven
and  incremental  across  the Asia  and  Pacific  region,  highlighting  the
need  for  scaled -up  technical and financial support. Greater efforts are
needed to put the region on track,  especially given the setbacks that economies
face due to the disruption caused by the  war in Ukraine and the COVID-19
pandemic.  56.  Between 2016 and 2021, almost 380 million people gained access
to electricity  in the Asia and the Pacific region. Over that period, the
region’s population increased  by  180  million,  leading  to  a  rise  in  the
rate  of  electrification  from  94.0  per  cent  to  98.6 per cent.  57.  In
2021, almost 1.2 billion people – nearly one quarter of the population of the
Asia and the Pacific region – were without access to clean cooking. The region
is not  on track to meet this target of Goal 7 of universal access to clean
cooking by 2030.  This is especially the case in rural areas, where the access
rate stood at 57 per cent.   58.  In recent  years,  the region  has  been in
the  lead globally for renewable energy  development,  particularly  in  the
power  sector,  where  renewables  now  present  the  lowest-cost  option  in
many  circumstances.  However,  although  renewable  energy  installations are
increasing in number, they still constitute a relatively small share of  total
final energy consumption in many countries due to the overall growth in energy
demand. In 2020, modern renewable energy accounted for 12.5 per cent of total
final  energy  consumption  in  the  region.  This  pushed  the  overall  share
of  renewables  –  including both modern and traditional forms  – to its highest
level so far, at 19.1 per  cent.  While  renewables  have  not  increased  at
the  same  scale  in  the  heating  and  transport sectors, electrification of
end uses provides great opportunities for further  progress.  23-13986  8/16
A/78/201      59.  A significant gap remains, however, between the progress made
by the region’s  wealthier nations and its developing countries, despite an
impressive sixfold growth  in renewable generating capacity since 2010. Those
countries with a high income or  upper-middle  income  have  witnessed  a
remarkable  threefold  surge  in  renewable  energy  installations,  while
those  with  a  low  income  or  lower-middle  income  have  made only minimal
progress on a per capita basis.  60.  Energy intensity in the region’s emerging
economies continues to be relatively  high compared to its developed countries.
Many smaller countries are not achieving  sufficient  improvement,  and  this
means  that  further  policy  attention  in  this  area  is  required.
Latin America and the Caribbean      61.  The  Latin America  and the  Caribbean
region  has  made significant progress in  terms of access to electricity in
recent years, reaching a 96.5 per cent access rate in  2021. There are, however,
still  significant inequalities accentuating energy poverty.  The  most
vulnerable  fifth  of  the  population  has  about  nine  times  less  access
to  electricity than the richest. In recent years, energy efficiency has not
increased, either,  except  for  a  slight  improvement  in  the  transportation
sector,  which  consumes  the  largest proportion of fossil fuel energy.  In
2021, 96.5 per cent of the population in both urban and rural areas had access,
62.  while  the  proportion  of  the  population  with  primary  reliance  on
clean  fuels  and  technology was 62 per cent. Most of the 16.1 million people
who are not connected  to electricity in Latin America and the Caribbean live in
rural and remote areas where  the costs of extending networks and infrastructure
are high.  63.  In the region, 78 million people do not have access to clean
cooking fuels and  technologies.  Indicators  prior  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic
already  showed  that  households across the region were allocating a hig h
proportion of their spending to  fuel. Indeed, this could reach up to 10 per
cent of their total expenditure. Electricity  can account for up to 5 per cent
of household spending, while in most countries the  percentage can be up to four
times higher for the most vulnerable quintiles.  64.  In  2021,  the  level  of
renewable  electricity  generation  within  the  energy  mix  increased  to  an
average  of  59  per  cent.  In  particular,  during  2021,  wind  and  solar
continued to expand. A total of 23.5 GW of new capacity in electricity
generation was  installed  around  the  region  that  year.  Of  this  total,
non-renewable  thermal  power  plants  accounted  for 4.5  GW,  wind power
plants  5.9  GW,  solar  photovoltaic  power  plants 9.8 GW, hydroelectric power
plants 2.423 GW and the rest was comp osed of  renewable, biogas and biomass
thermal power plants. This meant 81 per cent of the  total was based on
renewable energy.  65.  Regional energy intensity decreased by 17 per cent in
the three decades to 2020.  That year, the energy intensity level of primary
energy, using constant 2017 GDP at  purchasing power parity, was 3.31  MJ per
dollar. Transport, which uses 36 per cent  of the energy in the region, was the
only productive sector that experienced a slight  increase in efficiency over
the above period.      Member States of the Economic Commission for Europe
66.  Even before the crises and challenges of recent years, progress in the
Economic  Commission for Europe (ECE) region towards achieving Goal 7 was
already too slow  to meet the 2030 target. Amid an overall positive Goal 7
implementation trend, this  report confirms the gap between actual progress and
what would be required for the  achievement of Goal 7.  23-13986  9/16
A/78/201      67.  Although  access  to  electricity  and  the  use  of  clean
fuels  for  cooking,  heating  and lighting is widespread in the ECE region –
and deployment of renewable energy  had  been  increasing  and  energy
efficiency  has  also  been  improving  –  the  rate  of  progress has not been
high enough to make the energy targets of Goal 7 achievable.   68.  Particular
challenges include the affordability of clean fuels and technologies,  which  is
particularly  acute  for  low-income  households  but  is  a  growing  problem
across  the  region;  a  shortage  of  skills  and  qualifications,  which  can
be  seen  particularly  in  the  deployment  and  maintenance  of  clean  energy
technologies;  and  to  optimal  persistent  behavioural  barriers,  which
often  act  as  an  obstacle  organizational potential.  69.  The ECE region
accounts for almost half of the 1,971 GW renewables installed  worldwide. In
2020, 44 ECE member States had a share of renewable energy in their  energy mix
above 10 per cent, as compared to 26 countries in 2000 and 40 countries  in
2015. The region has seen unprecedented growth in renewable electricity, but
that  is not the case in transport sector or space heating and cooling.   70.
Public and private investment in renewable energy across many ECE countries
remains  modest  compared  to  global  growth  trends.  For  instance,
investments  in  17  countries  of  South-Eastern  and  Eastern  Europe,  the
Caucasus  and  Central Asia  are  particularly insufficient.  71.  There has
been some progress on energy efficiency, but much more remains to  be done. The
regional average energy intensity fell from 7.19  MJ per dollar in 2000  to 4.18
MJ per dollar in 2019. However, inconsistencies in the rate of improvement  can
be observed between countries.      Least developed countries, landlocked
developing countries and small island    developing States    72.  Urgent
international attention is needed to address the inequalities in access to
sustainable  energy  that  are  faced  by  the  least  developed  countries,  l
andlocked  developing countries and small island developing States. Unless
efforts are scaled up  significantly  in  these  countries,  the  world  will
fall  short  of  its  Goal  7  target  of  universal access to affordable,
reliable and modern energy services by 2030.   73.  Supported  by  technological
leapfrogging,  faster  deployment  of  renewables  in  least  developed
countries,  landlocked  developing  countries  and  small  island  developing
States  can  help  to  bridge  the  sustainable  energy  access  gap,
strengthen  energy  security  and  support  climate  goals.  A  major  shift  in
strategy  is  required,  however,  to  significantly  increase  these
countries’  access  to  accessible  and  appropriate  financing  and  support
clean  or  low-carbon  energy  initiatives.  In  this  regard,  public  finance
remains  crucial  to  de-risking  and  mobilizing  private  sector  investment,
bringing new markets to maturity in these countries.   74.  Currently,
international public finance in support of energy is still concentrated  in a
few countries and on larger projects. Therefore, a con certed effort is needed
by  developed  countries,  governments  and  international  organizations  to
support  local  enterprises  in  the  least  developed  countries,  landlocked
developing  countries  and  small  island  developing  States,  particularly
small  and  medium -sized  enterprises,  off-grid developers and organizations
led by women.   75.  In  2021,  electrification  rates  in  the  least
developed  countries  and  landlocked  developing countries continued to rise,
but remained low, at 56 per cent and 60 per  cent respectively. Access to
electricity is higher in small island developing States, at  76 per cent. This
still meant, however, that 481 million people in the least developed  countries
were without any access to electricity in 2021. This figure was almost two
thirds of the total global population lacking access.  23-13986  10/16
A/78/201      76.  An  estimated  32  million  people  a  year  in  the  least
developed  countries  had  access to electricity  between 2019 and 2021.
However, this rate needs to more than  double to 63 million new connections per
year if the goal of universal access is to be  achieved by 2030.  In  line  with
worldwide  trends,  in  the  least  developed  countries,  landlocked  77.
developing countries and small island developing States advances in access to
clean  cooking  have  been  slower  than  in  electrification  over  the  past
10  years.  The  proportion of the population with access to clean cooking
solutions in these countries  were 25 per cent, 28 per cent and 58 per cent
respectively in 2021. In comparison, the  worldwide average was 71 per cent.
78.  Potentially, these countries could make considerable strides toward s
achieving  Goal 7 by using their abundant natural energy resources. However, in
comparison to  other developing economies, they are falling behind global trends
in the adoption of  cutting-edge renewable technologies.  79.  Installed
renewable power generation capacity is growing in the least developed
countries,  landlocked  developing  countries  and  small  island  developing
States,  although more slowly than in other developing countries.   80.  In
terms of United States dollars, international public financial flows in support
of  clean  energy  fell  for  a  fourth  year  in  a  row  in  2021,  down  to
$10.8  billion  after  standing at $26 billion in 2017. In 2021, the countries
where support was needed the  most received relatively little.  81.  Energy
intensity  improved  in  small  island  developing  States  and  landlocked
developing  countries  while  declining  in  the  least  developed  countries.
There  was  a  huge drop in GDP and energy consumption in 2020, making it
difficult to identify any  particular trend in energy intensity, as the
indicator was affected by factors unrelated  to energy efficiency during the
period in question.       IV.  Follow-up to the high-level dialogue on energy
and the    United Nations Decade of Sustainable Energy for All  (2014– 2024)
82.  In resolution 77/170, the General Assembly took note of the high-level
dialogue  on energy held on 24 September 2021 to promote the implementation of
the energy - related goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in support  of the implementation of the Decade and the voluntary
commitments in the form of  almost  200  energy  compacts.  The  Assembly  took
note  of  the  Secretary-General’s  proposed road map for accelerated action on
Goal 7, as described in the report of the  Secretary-General  (A/77/211),  and
the  high-level  political  forum  on  sustainable  development.  In line with
the Secretary-General’s proposed road map for accelerated action  83.  on Goal
7, follow-up efforts have been accelerated around its five focus areas:  (a)
Closing the  energy  access  gap,  to  achieve  access  to  clean  energy for
the  over  675  million  people  who  currently  live  without  electricity  and
for  the  over  2.3 billion  people  still  relying  on  harmful  fuels  for
cooking,  with  a  focus  on  vulnerable regions, countries and groups, while
also emphasizing the importance of  productive uses of energy for economic
empowerment;    (b)  Rapidly transitioning to decarbonized energy systems,
through renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency,  to  dramatically  reduce
greenhouse  gas  emissions,    23-13986  11/16    A/78/201      advance  climate
action  and  strengthen  energy  security,  while  accelerating  action  to
phase out coal power generation and fossil fuel subsidies globally;   (c)
Mobilizing  adequate  and  predictable  finance,  to  triple  global  inve
stment  in  renewable  energy  and  energy  efficiency,  catalyse  public  and
private  finance  and  investment, increase finance and investment for
developing countries and small island  developing States;     (d)  Leaving no
one behind on the path to a net-zero future to ensure that the    global energy
transition is just, inclusive and equitable;  (e)  Harnessing  innovation,
technology  and  data,  including  to  promote    technology transfer to
developing countries.  84.  Ongoing  efforts,  however,  must  be  dramatically
enhanced  and  intensified  in  order to accelerate the achievement of Goal 7.
85.  As  the  secretariat  of  the  high-level  dialogue  on  energy,  the
Department  of  Economic and Social Affairs will continue to provide support for
the follow -up to the  high-level dialogue on energy, working closely with UN-
Energy and other partners.      V.  Review of Goal 7 at the high-level political
forum        In  2023,  the  high-level  political  forum  convened  under  the
auspices  of  the  86.  Economic  and  Social  Council  conducted  an  in-depth
review  of  Goal  7  for  the  first  time since 2018.   In  preparation  of
the  review,  a  global  expert  group  meeting  was  convened  in  87.  New
York on 11 and 12 May, gathering more than 70 experts from a wide variety of
backgrounds and geographical regions.   88.  The summary of the meeting included
six key recommendations in support of  the review of Goal 7, building on the
follow-up to the high-level dialogue on energy  and the Decade:  (a)  Do  what
is  needed  immediately  to  provide  everyone  with  access  to    electricity
and clean cooking;   (b)  Urgently  accelerate  just,  inclusive  and  equitable
energy  transitions    worldwide;   (c)  Triple investment flows for clean
energy;     (d)  Boost  the  overall  impacts  of  energy  action  by  better
capitalizing  on  the  links between Goal 7 and other Goals, and across the
various Goal 7 targets on energy  access, efficiency and renewables;     (e)
Invest  in  transformative  partnerships  that  can  rapidly  expand  progress
towards Goal 7, such as the energy compacts; 2   (f)  Establish a permanent
platform for intergovernmental dialogues on energy  at the United Nations, with
the effective engagement of business, civil society, young  people and other
stakeholders, noting that sustained, global dialogue on energy at the  United
Nations, including at the technical level, would be an important step towards
strengthening inclusive and meaningful multilateral cooperation.
__________________  2  See https://www.un.org/en/energycompacts.     23-13986
12/16    A/78/201      VI.  Scaling up action and implementing energy compacts
89.  It is essential for efforts to be more ambitious if Goal 7 and net-zero
emissions  are  to  be.  Realizing  the  global  road  map  will  bring  us  on
track  towards  these  objectives. All stakeholders must scale up their efforts
and implement transformative  action.  90.  By  mobilizing  voluntary
commitments  from  all  stakeholders  (including  the  private sector, young
people and civil society, in addition to Member States) and by  providing  an
effective  tool  for  driving  holistic  and  inclusive  action,  the  energy
compacts are a key vehicle by which to turn the global road map into concrete
actions  and partnerships.  91.  Since their inception, the energy compacts have
been  instrumental in efforts to  deliver concrete results on the ground. As
reported in 2022, $46 billion was invested  towards energy compact commitments.
Enhanced electricity access was provided to  6  million  people  and  improved
access  to  clean  cooking  for  14  mi llion  people.  Furthermore,  88  GW  of
renewable  energy  capacity  have  been  installed  and  2,450  gigawatt-hours
of energy have been saved through energy efficiency.    92.  Moving  forward,
energy  compacts  must  be  further  strengthened.  The  Energy  Compact Action
Network, which was launched on 4 May 2022, will be enhanced to  mobilize
further  commitments,  monitor  progress  on  individual  and  multiparty
compacts, identify  drivers of  success  as  well  as  opportunities for
collaboration  and  support,  and  recognize  gaps  that  require  additional
action  from  existing  and  new  compact proponents. UN-Energy will continue to
support the network.   93.  The  Sustainable  Development  Goals  Summit
represents  a  vital  opportunity  to  change course, move from rhetoric to
action and breakthrough to a better world. The  United  Nations  development
system  will  seek  to  rally  all  actors  behind  a  set  of  high-impact
initiatives  to  bring  progress  to  scale  between  now  and  2030.  Energy
compacts,  as  one  of  the  12  high-impact  initiatives,  will  showcase
ambitious  commitments  and  progress  from  Member  States  and  non-State
actors  in  order  to  inspire  increased  action  towards  achieving  Goal  7
and  the  energy  transition  in  alignment  with  the  Secretary-General’s
acceleration  agenda  and  climate  solidarity  pact.      VII.  Towards the
global stocktaking of the implementation of    Goal 7 at the completion of the
Decade      94.  The General Assembly, in its resolution 77/170, requested the
President of the  General  Assembly  to  convene  a  global  stocktaking,
funded  from  extrabudgetary  resources,  to  be  held  in  2024,  marking  the
completion  of  the  ongoing  efforts  to  implement the plan of action of the
Decade, and building on the follow-up to the high- level  dialogue  on  energy,
to  further  accelerate  the  implementation  of  Goal  7  of  the  2030 Agenda.
95.  The global  stocktaking  provides a unique  opportunity  to  mobilize
action s  and  solutions including means of implementation, share practical
experiences and lessons,  and further accelerate the implementation  of  Goal 7
in support of  the 2030 Agenda  and  the  Paris Agreement  on  climate  change,
building  on  the  follow -up  to  the  high- level  dialogue  on  energy,
including  the  global  road  map  for  accelerated  action  on  Goal 7, the
implementation of the plan of action of the Decade, the review of Goal 7  at the
high-level political forum and learning from the implementation of the energy
compacts. It will also provide an opportunity to discuss energy issues in view
of the  Summit of the Future.  23-13986  13/16    A/78/201      96.  Outcomes
of  the  stocktaking  should  consist  of  a  non-negotiated  outcome  document
and  voluntary  commitments  and  actions  by  all  stakeholders,  including
through energy compacts.   97.  The  global  stocktaking  can  help  to  further
accelerate  implementation   of  the  global  road  map  for  accelerated
action  on  Goal  7  and  the  objectives  of  the  Paris  Agreement under the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Ch ange by  addressing three key
areas:  (a)  Energy  access:  universal  energy  access  to  electricity  and
clean  cooking  solutions  is  a  prerequisite  and  catalyst  for  improving
the  living  and  working  conditions  of  all  the  world’s  people,
especially  the  poorest  and  most  vulnerable  populations who presently lack
any modern energy services;  it is also integral to the  transition  to  an
inclusive,  just,  sustainable,  secure  and  net-zero  emissions  energy
system;    (b)  Just,  inclusive  and  equitable  energy  transitions:  to
further  propel  energy  transitions based on renewable energy and energy
efficiency, it is necessary to ensure  that they leave no one behind, are aimed
at enhancing human well-being, health and  capabilities,  increase  resilience,
empower  women  and  young  people,  and  drive  innovation towards a
sustainable society at all levels, while also driving large-scale  investment.
Such transition pathways will vary on the basis of the individual needs of
countries and regions, including a variety of transitional measures;     (c)
Means  of  implementation:  to  enable  decisive  action,  it  is  ess ential
to  significantly  strengthen  the  means  of  implementation,  focusing  in
particular  on  catalysing  finance  and  investment,  especially  for
vulnerable  regions,  countries  and  groups. Efforts to drive innovation,
creating a pipeline of projects, new technologies,  capacity-building and
quality data, is crucial for achieving Goal 7.    98.  Preparations for the
global stocktaking could include:    (a)  Regional  and  thematic  consultations
including  Member  States  and  other    stakeholders such as the private
sector, civil society and academia;   (b)  Elaboration  of  technical  inputs
including  lessons  learned,  policy  options    and recommendations based on
expert analysis; and  (c)  Mobilization of all stakeholders towards Goal 7 and
net-zero emissions so  as to spur further action and partnerships, including
through energy compacts, as well  as other partnership arrangements.    99.  As
a follow-up to the high-level dialogue on energy, including the global road  map
for accelerated action on Goal 7, and building on the implementation of the plan
of action of the Decade and the review of Goal 7 at the high -level political
forum on  sustainable development, Member States may wish to consider the
establishment of  an  open-ended  group  of  experts,  composed  of  Member
States,  to  inform  the  preparations for, deliberations at and follow-up to
the global stocktaking. The group  could  serve  to  facilitate  an  exchange
of  knowledge  and  perspectives  in  a  non-negotiated  manner,  with  the  aim
of  strengthening  intergovernmental  dialogues  on  energy,  including,  as
appropriate,  a  potential  permanent  intergovernmental  platform on energy,
including, as observers, representatives of regional commissions  and  regional
and  international  entities,  as  recommended  by  the  expert  group  in  a
meeting in May 2023, to provide critical technical advice and support as needed.
The  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs  would  serve  as  the
secretariat  of  the  expert group.  100.  The  Department  of  Economic  and
Social Affairs  will  continue  to  support  the  Secretary-General  in
coordinating  the  relevant  activities  in  support  of  follow -up  to
23-13986  14/16    A/78/201      the high-level dialogue on energy, the
implementation of the Decad e and the global  stocktaking in close collaboration
with UN-Energy and other relevant stakeholders.         VIII.  Strengthening
coherence and coordination  through UN-Energy      101.  The  General Assembly,
through  its resolution  77/170, encouraged  UN-Energy  to  support  coherence
and  coordination  across  the  energy-related  activities  of  the  entities of
the United Nations development system, within their respective mandates.  Under
the leadership of the  UN-Energy Co-Chairs, the Administrator for the United
Nations Development Programme, Achim Steiner, and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Sustainable Energy for All, Damilola Ogunbiyi, UN
-Energy  is working on bringing the United Nations system together for more
integrated and  coherent delivery of policy and normative support. The
Department of Economic and  Social Affairs provides the secretariat for UN-
Energy.  102.  In support of the global road map for accelerated action on Goal
7, UN -Energy  is continuing to implement its plan of action towards 2025,
including by:   (a)  Accelerating  action  through  the  development  of  joint
initiatives  on  electricity  access  and  clean  cooking,  including  in
support  of  the  empowerment  of  women and young people;    (b)  Catalysing
multi-stakeholder  partnerships,  including  through  the  energy    compact;
(c)  Increasing momentum, for example by convening the first session of the
EnergyNow SDG7 Action Forum on 23 September 2022;  (d)  Informing  the  global
agenda  by  providing  policy  analysis,  including    through a newly launched
series of UN-Energy policy briefs; and  (e)  Tracking and sharing results by
reporting, a revamped digital platform and    a series of outreach activities
including UN-Energy webinars.  103.  UN-Energy members will continue to
collaborate towards the annual overview  of progress towards Goal 7, entitled
Tracking SDG 7: The  Energy  Progress Report,  which  is  prepared  jointly  by
the  International  Energy  Agency,  the  International  Renewable  Energy
Agency,  the  Statistics  Division  of  the  Department  of  Economic  and
Social Affairs,  the World  Bank  Group  and  the World  Health  Organization,
and  contribute to the series of policy briefs compiled by the Technical
Advisory Group.   104.  UN-Energy will continue to strengthen capacity-building
and sharing of lessons  learned,  including  on  specific  interlinkages  of
Goal  7.  Ongoing  efforts  include  activities through the Health and Energy
Platform of Action operated jointly by the  World  Health  Organization,  the
Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs,  the  United Nations Development
Programme and the World Bank; the Sustainable Water  and Energy Solutions
partnership created by the Department of Economic and Social  Affairs and Itaipu
Binacional; and the global conference on climate and Sustainable  Development
Goal synergies, jointly organized by the D epartment of Economic and  Social
Affairs  and  the  secretariat  of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention
on  Climate Change.  105.  UN-Energy  will  play  a  key  role  in  the
preparations  for  the  2024  global  stocktaking, including in the coordination
and preparation of consultations, as well as  in the follow-up to the
recommendations from the 2023 high-level political forum on  its review of Goal
7 and from the Sustainable Development Goals Summit.  23-13986  15/16
A/78/201      106.  The UN-Energy secretariat at the Department for Economic and
Social Affairs  will continue to be strengthened to support the implementation
of its plan of action in  close cooperation with UN-Energy members and partners
as well as the Development  Coordination Office, as needed.      IX.  Conclusion
107.  The international community must step up and double down regarding action
on  Goal  7  in  order  to  achieve  the  Goals  and  net-zero  emissions.
Accelerating  just  and  equitable  energy  transitions is needed  more  than
ever,  as the current  trajectory  will  result  in  failure. All  stakeholders
must  urgently  increase  their  efforts  in  support  of  Goal 7.  108.  The
momentum  created  by  the  high-level  dialogue  on  energy  and  the
implementation of the Decade of Sustainable Energy for All (2014–2024) needs to
be  built  upon  to  spur  further  progress  in  line  with  the  global  road
map  for  accelerated  action on Goal 7.  109.  The Sustainable Development
Goals Summit, the global stocktaking of Goal 7  implementation  and  the  Summit
of  the  Future,  provide  a  unique  opportunities  to  galvanize political
commitment and strengthen concerted action. In follow -up to the  high-level
dialogue on energy, including the global road map for accelerated action  on
Goal 7, and in building on the implementation of the plan of action for the
Decade,  and the review of Goal 7 at the 2023 high-level political forum, Member
States may  wish to consider the establishment of an open-ended group of
experts, composed of  Member States, to inform the preparations for,
deliberations at and follow-up to the  global stocktaking. The group could serve
to facilitate an exchange of knowledge and  perspectives  the  aim  of
strengthening  intergovernmental  dialogues  on  energy,  including,  as
appropriat e,  a  potential  permanent  intergovernmental  platform  on  energy,
as  recommended  by  the  expert  group in a meeting in May 2023 and as
discussed at the review of Goal 7 by the 2023  high-level political forum.  in
a  non-negotiated  manner,  with  110.  A permanent platform for
intergovernmental dialogues on energy at the United  Nations  could  serve  as
an  important  step  towards  providing  regular  support  for  strengthened,
inclusive  and  meaningful  multilateral  cooperation.  Such  a  platform  could
be informed by the outcomes of the 2024 global stocktaking in order to ensure
the effective follow-up to the Decade and the high-level dialogue on energy
convened  in 2021.  111.  UN-Energy  will  continue  to  strengthen  coherence
within  the  United  Nations  system  on  energy  and  step  up  support to
Members  States and other partners  in  line  with its plan of action, and in
support of the follow-up on the high-level dialogue on  energy, the
implementation of the Decade, the global stocktaking, other major global
engagements  such  as  the  International  Vienna  Energy  and  Climate  Forum,
and  relevant outcomes of the Africa Climate Summit, Climate Ambition Summit and
the  twenty-eighth  session  of  the  Conference  of  the  Parties  to  the
United  Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change.  112.  It is only
through resolute action and international cooperation that sustainable  and
resilient  societies can be built  successfully, ensuring that no  one is left
behind,  while bringing the objectives of both the 2030 Agenda and the Paris
Agreement within  reach.    23-13986  16/16