Table of Contents:
I. UNDP within the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework .: Page: 2
II. Programme priorities and partnerships…………………………………………………. ……….…: Page: 3
III. Programme and risk management ……………………………………………….…………………: Page: 7
IV. Monitoring and evaluation…………………………………………………….……………………: Page: 8
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
I.  UNDP  within  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  
Framework 
1.  The Central African Republic  is endowed with agricultural potential, mineral  resources 
and vast forests, yet its population remains the world’s poorest, faced with numerous human 
development  challenges.  The  country  ranks  next  to  last  (188/189)  on  the    Human 
Development  Index  with  a  value  of    0.571.1  Along  with  the  chronic  insecurity  that  has 
plagued the country for decades, its   economic and social development are hampered by the 
lack  of  basic  infrastructure,  investments  in  productive  sectors  and  the  State's  weak 
institutional  and  financial  capacity  to  fulfil  its  crit ical  functions.  The  country  is  facing 
increasing climate risks,  which can derail the prospects for sustainable development.  
2.  History shows that pre- and post-electoral periods  lead to risin g sociopolit ical tensions, 
most recently manifesting  in v iolent attacks by armed groups  attempting to d isrupt national 
elections  in 2020-2021. Some a rmed groups, signatories to  the peace agreement, formed an 
alliance to disrupt voting, thus  reducing the participation rate despite the timely deployment 
of trained agents and equipment. 
3. 
In  response,  the  United  Nations  Sustainable  Development  Cooperation  Framework 
(UNSDCF)  for  2023-2027  is  based  on  national  priorit ies,  the  National  Recovery  and 
Peacebuildin g Plan (Plan National de Relèvement et de Consolidation de la Paix2 (RCPC A)). 
UNDP  will  target  groups  at  risk  of  being  left  behind  identified  in  the  Common  Country 
Analysis:  (a)  young  people  underemployed  at    risk  of  recruitment  into  armed  groups;  (b) 
internally disp laced persons, est imated at 722,101,3 with  immense needs for emergency and 
recovery  assistance;  (c)  vict ims  of  human  rights  v iolations;  (d)  ethnic  minorities 4  who 
continue  to  face  significant  obstacles  in  claiming  their  rights;  (e)  women,  who  remain  the 
main  victims  of  gender-based  discrimination;  (f)  persons  with  disabilities, 5  who  are  more 
likely  to  face  stigma,  abuse  and  exclusion  from  education;  and  (g)  prisoners,  estimated  at 
2,000, 73 pe cent of whom are awaiting trial. 
4.  The  comparative  advantage  of  UNDP  is  based  on  its  strategic  positioning  within  the 
United  Nations  country  team  (UNCT).  As  a  provider  of  integrated  solutions  and a  trusted 
partner  for  the  implementation  of  the  UNSDCF,  UNDP  prio rit izes:  (a)  consolidation  of  the 
rule of  law by supporting access to justice and security,  the fight against corruption and the 
organization  of  national  elections;(b)  access  to  economic  opportunities  by  supporting  the 
private sector while promoting access of vulnerable populations to decent jobs, basic services 
and  social  protection;  (c)  the  consolidation  of  peace  and  the  prevention  of  conflict  by 
capitalizing  on  the  Government's  efforts    towards  decentralization,  local  development  and 
governance,  but  also  by  tackling  the  main  barriers  to  gender  equality;  and  (d)  sustainable 
management of natural resources by  upscaling protected areas while  creating new jobs.  
5.  The  evaluation of the previous programme showed that UNDP demonstrated its unique 
comparative  advantage  in  provid ing  basic  infrastructure,  materials  and  human  capacities. 
UNDP  supported the organization of national elections,  whose results have been accepted by 
all  stakeholders,  despite  rising  vio lence  by  armed  groups.  The  UNDP  contribution  was 
essential to the temporary functioning of ru le-of-law institutions and combating gender-based 
violence. Moreover 24,000 people benefited from the UNDP  resilience-build ing programme 
which  created  employment  opportunities  and  enhanced  social  cohesion.  UNDP  also 
 
1Human Development  Index 2019 .  
2 The RCPCA priorities are to:(a) support peace, security and reconciliation;  (b) renew the social contract  between the State and society; 
and (c) ensure economic  recovery and the revival of productive sectors.  
3 Office for the Coordination  of Humanitarian  Affairs (OCHA) report, September  2021. 
4 Aka/Bayaka (Pygmies) and the Mbororo (Fulani). 
5 OCHA report, 2022 estimate  is 430,000. 
2 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
contributed to fostering policies and advocating for inst itutional changes to improve access to 
energy. 
6.  Reflecting  the  country  context  and  its  lessons  learned,  UNDP  will  apply  a  two-level 
strategic approach focusing on resilience. At  the inst itutional level, UNDP will strengthen the 
State's  capacities  to  promote  security  and  the  rule  of  law  to  end  impunity  related  to  war 
crimes,  including  gender-based  violence,  thus  creating  conditions  for  transformative  and 
inclusive  development  essential  for    sustaining  peace  in  the  country.  At  the  individual  and 
community  levels,  UNDP  will  improve  community  infrastructure,  strengthen  resilience  to 
climate change, and promote inclusive finance to expand economic and social opportunities. 
Enhanced  collaboration  with  the  Government  to  scaling-up  decentralization  and  local 
development will be at the heart of the UNDP st rategic approach followin g the 2019 Po lit ical 
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in  the Central African Republic. The adoption of the 
humanitarian-development-peace  nexus  will  ensure  a  bridge  and  bring  more  coherence 
between  humanitarian  support,  peacebuildin g  and  development.  UNDP  will  scale  up 
innovations building on the results of UNDP  Accelerator Labs. 
II.  Programme priorities  and partnerships  
7.  The programmatic prio rit ies emerged from consultative workshops held with government 
and  other  national  counterparts.  Guided  by  the  vision  of  the  UNSDC F  to  make the  Central 
African  Republic    a  country  guided  by  the  rule  of  law  that  is  stable,  prosperous  and  in 
harmony with nature, where its populations fully realize their potential and benefit equitably 
from the development of the country, the UNSDCF has four priorities aligned to the RCPC A: 
(a) promotion of peace, security, human rights and the rule of law; (b) inclusion and equitable 
access to quality basic social services;  (c) sk ills development and accelerated, inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth; and (d) environmental sustainability and resilience to crises and 
the impacts of climate change.  
8.  To achieve these priorit ies, the UNCT developed seven UNSDCF outcomes. Four pertain 
to UNDP,  which grouped them under three country programme pillars, namely: (a) structural 
transformation and citizen participation, (b) recovery, stabilization and peacebuilding; and (c) 
environment,  energy  and  climate  change.  The  relationship  between  the  UNSDCF  and  the 
UNDP  county programme is illustrated in the table below. 
 
UNSDCF 
pillar 
UNSDCF 
outcome  
Country 
programme 
pillar  
Structural 
transformation 
and citizen 
participation  
Recovery, 
stabilization 
and 
peacebuilding    
Country  programme outcome (by 2027)  
Peace 
Outcome 
2 
People in the Central African Republic live under the rule 
of law, have access to justice and security and their 
human rights are promoted and protected. 
Prosperity  Outcome 
People in Central African Republic, including  women, 
youth, refugees, returnees, internally displaced persons 
and all other vulnerable groups, have equitable and 
sustainable access to economic opportunities that 
promote the creation of decent jobs, entrepreneurship, 
innovation and digitalization.  
People in the Central African Republic live in an 
environment where peacebuilding, national reconciliation 
and governance mechanisms are inclusive, accountable 
and effective.  
2  
Peace  
Outcome 
1 
Recovery, 
stabilization 
and 
peacebuilding 
3 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
Planet 
Outcome 
1 
Environment, 
energy and 
climate change 
The resilience  of the State and population is strengthened 
through the sustainable governance of natural resources 
and the environment.  
 
9.  To  maximize  impact,  the  UNCT  has  adopted  two  approaches.  The  first  aims  to   pool 
efforts  among  the  UNCT  members  by  involving  two  or  more agencies  (joint  projects).  The 
second,  the  humanitarian-development-peace  nexus,  aims  to  build  a  bridge  between 
humanitarian  responses,  development  activities  and  peacebuilding  efforts.  UNDP  has  a 
demonstrated track record in this area, especially r ru le of law and gender mainstreaming, as 
found by the evaluation of the previous programme.  
10.  The hypothesis underlying the country programme’s overarching theory of change  states 
that: (a) if people in  the Central African Republic live under the rule of law, have access to 
justice and security and their human rights are promoted and protected;  (b) if they live  in an 
environment  where  peacebuildin g,  national  reconciliation  and  governance  mechanisms  are 
inclusive, accountable and effective; (c) if all people in the country, including women, youth, 
refugees, returnees,  internally displaced persons (IDPs) and all other vulnerable groups, have 
equitable and sustainable access to economic opportunities that promote the creation of decent 
jobs, entrepreneurship, innovation and digitalization;  (d) if the resilience of the State and the 
population  is  strengthened  through  the  sustainable  governance  of  natural  resources  and  the 
environment; and (e) assuming that peace and security are restored throughout the territory , 
the  political  commitment  of  all  stakeholders  is  obtained ,  structural  resistance  to  gender 
equality  and  the  empowerment  of  women  are  overcome  and  the  technical  and  financial 
partners  continue  their  support;  (f)  then  the  country  will  be  a   stable,  prosperous  State,  in 
harmony  with  nature,  that  respects  the  rule  of  law  and  its  people  will  fully  realize  their 
potential and benefit equitably from the development of the country. In this perspective, the 
programme will pay attention to innovation, digitalization and strategic partnerships as main 
enablers. 
Pillar 1. Structural transformation and citizen participation 
11.  Focusing on signature solutions 2 and 6 of  the UNDP  Strategic  Plan, 2022-2025 and in 
partnership  with  the  Ministry  in  charge  of  justice,  civil  society  organizations  (CSOs),  the 
United  Nations  Multidimensional  Integrated  Stabilization  Mission  in   the  Central  African 
Republic (MINUSCA) and donors, the programme will continue to support the strengthening 
of the judicial system to end impunity, includin g from major crimes, and broaden access to 
justice  for  all  citizens,  particularly  focusing  on  women,  prisoners,  ethnic  minorities  and 
victims  of  human  rights  violation.  At  the  core  of  the  programme  priorit ies  will  be  the 
redeployment  of  institutions  throughout  the  country,  th e  strengthening  of  operational 
capacities on the ground, the continuation of judicial proceedings undertaken by the Special 
Criminal  Court,  the  operationalization  of  the  Truth,  Justice,  Reparation  and  Reconciliation 
Commission,  the  promotion  of  the  rule  of  law and  the  protection  of  human  rights.  For  the 
operationalization of the Court, South-South and triangular cooperation will be stren gthened 
with key countries. 
12.  Buildin g  on  good  practices  from  the  previous  cycle,  partnering  with  the  Ministry  of 
Interior  and  Public  Security  and  MINUSCA,  UNDP  will  support  the  capacity-building  of 
internal security forces on community policin g and accountability of public services , crucial 
for  restoring  trust  between  State  institutions  and  citizens  while  advocating  for  greater 
representation of women.  
13.  Collaborating  with  MINUSC A  and  donors,  UNDP  will  support  democratic  processes 
through transparent and inclusive elect ions, ensuring the participation of women, persons with 
disabilit ies  and  ethnic  minorities.  The  capacities  of  institutions  including  the  National 
Election Commission,  National Assembly, Constitutional Court and  communal councils  will 
4 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
be strengthened. In parallel, capacity-buildin g for CSOs, including those led by women, youth 
and  persons  with  disabilities,  will  be  priorit ized  along  with  the  promotion  of  citizen 
participation and the fight against inequalities at all levels.     
14.  UNDP,  in  collaboration  with  line  ministries,  the  United  Nations  Entity  for  Gender 
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), MINUSCA, donors and CSOs, will 
promote  women's  empowerment  and  leadership  for  sustainable  development.  UNDP  will 
ensure that gender is mainstreamed throughout the programme, while also addressing multiple 
forms of discrimination based on age, disability, class, ethnicity, religion  and displaced person 
status, so that no one is left behind.  
15.  To optimize the provision of accessible and quality public serv ices, in  partnership with 
the High Authority for Good Governance and lines min istries,  the programme will support the 
revitalization of public administration at the central and local levels  by consolidating ongoing 
South-South  cooperation  with  Rwanda and  Burundi  and  promoting  strengthened  economic 
and financial governance.  
16.  The results obtained in this p illar  intend to create a favourable environment for pillar 2 
below.  
Pillar 2. Recovery, stabilization and peacebuilding 
Equitable and sustainable access to economic opportunities  and basic public services 
17.  In  line  with  UNDP  signature  solutions  1,  3  and  6,  this  pillar  is  st ructured  around  two 
priorities:   (a)  the  development  of  sustainable  and  inclusive  economic  opportunities  for 
entrepreneurship,  innovation  and  digit ization,  and  the  creation  of  decent  jobs; and  (b)  the 
consolidation of peace, national reconciliation and the establishment of inclusive, accountable 
and  effective  governance  mechanisms.  These  mechanisms  seek  to  advance  an  enabling 
environment for recovery and sustainable and inclusive growth.  
18.  UNDP  will  support  capacity-building  to  promote  inclusive  sustainable  development  at 
the  national  and  local  levels.  It  will  take  the  lead  in  supporting  strategic  planning  and 
monitoring  of  development,  working  with  the  Ministry  of  Economy,  Planning  and 
Cooperation.  Various  studies  and  collection  of  gender-  and age-disaggregated  data  will  be 
carried  out  to  gu ide  policy  and  programme  formulation  and  facilitate  the  monitoring  of 
implementation.  
19.  To improve access to economic opportunities and basic public services  for women, IDPs, 
youth, persons with d isabilities and ethnic minorities, the programme will emphasize creating 
the  conditions  for  inclusive  growth,  partnering  with  line  minist ries  and  CSOs,  including 
through joint programming with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO),  Un ited  Nations  Population  Fund and the  World  Food  Programme  (WFP).  This  will 
include capacity support to various stakeholders, developing frameworks for the private sector 
to operate efficiently and the promotion of micro and small enterprises.  The value chains in 
the productive sectors6 and public–private partnerships will be upscaled, taking advantage of 
the  African  Continental  Free  Trade  Area    agreement  and  other  regional  opportunities. 
Similarly,  innovative financial services will  be diversified.   
20.  Given  the  multiple  challenges  to  reviv ing  and  accelerating  growth  and  achieving  the 
Sustainable Development Goals and reflecting on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, a holistic 
approach  will  be  adopted under  the  leadership  of  the  Government to mobilize  all  available 
 
6 The productive sectors include  agriculture,  livestock, fisheries, forestry, handicrafts and mining.  For the mining sector, UNDP will 
support artisanal,  small-scale  and informal mining to improve productivity through access to resources, while ensuring that social and 
environmental  safeguards are strictly  adhered to and fully transparent. 
5 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
resources  and  channel  them  towards  national  development.  Based  on  an  assessment  of 
existing potential, includ ing m ining and forestry resources, public–private pa rtnerships, etc., 
an integrated framework for financing development will be developed in coordination with all 
relevant  actors  within  a  renewed  governance  framework.  UNDP  will  accelerate  actions, 
partnering  with  the  UNDP  Financial  Hub  and  optimizing  results  using  South-South 
cooperation. 
21.  Challenges  posed  by  IDPs  will  be  addressed  through  the  national  durable  solutions 
strategy. UNDP  will  intervene in  strategic areas identified, collaborating  with the  Office for 
the  Coordination  of  Humanitarian  Affairs  and  Office  of  the  United  Nations  High 
Commissioner for Refugees, anchored in the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. UNDP 
will partner with the Government, humanitarian actors and CSOs to support IDPs in accessing  
durable  solutions.    Resilient  and  sustainable  preparedness  systems  will  be  developed  to 
mitigate the effects of potential natural hazards and health crises. 
22.  To leave no one behind, this pillar will focus on strengthening social protection services 
and  systems  through  improved  capacity  and  governance  of  existing  structures  and 
mechanisms.  The  implementation  of  a  gender-sensitive  national  social  protection  policy 
reflecting the national  context will be essential to increase economic and social opportunities 
for the most vulnerable. 
Consolidation of peace and national reconciliation 
23.  UNDP  will  coordinate  and/or  strengthen  partnerships  with  various  actors  especially 
United Nations agencies and donors, noting the critical coordination and management roles of 
local communities for peacebuilding through reconciliation and dialogue processes. To ensure 
“do  no  harm”  and  maximize  peacebuilding  opportunities,  the  program me  will  stress 
prevention of and response to violent extremism,   applying a conflict-sensit ive  lens to  local 
development  planning  and  natural  resource  management  while  st rengthening  women’s 
leadership and full participation in peace and recovery. 
24.  Given  the  multip le  operational  challenges  on  the  ground,  particularly  in  the  eastern 
regions marked by insecurity, remoteness,  isolation and a small  local market for goods and 
services,  UNDP  will  upscale  partnerships  with  MINUSC A  and  non-governmental 
organizations (NGOs).     
Pillar 3. Environment, energy and climate change 
25.  Partnering  with  line  minist ries,  FAO,  WFP  and  the  secretariat  of  the  Convention  on 
Biological Diversity, this pillar will support the Government on UNDP signature solutions 3, 
4, 5 and 6 in buildin g a gender-sensitive, resilient, risk-informed and inclusive green economy 
that sustainably manages and harnesses its natural resources for prosperity for all  its people. 
The  linkage  with  the  Green  Climate  Fund  on  forests,  biodiversity,  food  security,  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises, non-timber forest products and renewable energy will  be expanded.  
26.  The programme will wo rk with key  NGOs, focusing on the sustainable management of 
natural  resources,  the  acceleration  of  the  energy  transition  to  renewable  energies  and  the 
implementation of policies that promote sustainable development . Inclusive and rights-based 
approaches  will  be  applied  to  promote  gender  equality  and  women’s  leadership  in  climate 
action.  
27.  UNDP  will  support  the  Ministry  in  charge  of  environment  to  implement    multilateral 
environmental  agreements  through  enhanced  partnership,  particularly  the  formulation  and 
implementation  of  strategies  for  nationally  determined  contributions.  The  transfer  of 
innovative  and  environmentally  sound,  risk-informed  technologies,  practices  and  capacities 
addressing  the  projected  climatic  risks  will  be  prioritized.  Gender-responsive  disaster  risk 
6 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
management,  climate  change  adaptation  and  co-mitigation  actions  will  target  the  energy, 
agriculture, forestry, protected areas, water and basic infrastructure sectors.   
28.  Innovative  climate  finance  opportunities  will  be  fully  explored  to  meet  the  country’s  
funding  needs  of  $1.7  billion  for  its  nationally  determined  contributions.  A  new  national 
climate  fund  will  be  operationalized  and  the  capacities  of  the  ministries  responsible  for 
environment, agriculture and livestock, rural development, energy and land -use planning will 
be strengthened to benefit from global opportunities.  
III.  Programme and risk management  
29.  This country programme document outlines  the  UNDP contributions to  national results 
and serves as the primary unit of accountability to the Executive Board for results alignment 
and resources assigned to the programme at country level. Accountabilities of managers at the 
country, regional and headqua rter levels with respect to country programme are prescribed in 
the  organization’s  programme and  operations  policies  and  procedures  and  internal  control 
framework. 
30.  The  programme  will  be  nationally  executed.  If  necessary,  national  execution  may  be 
replaced  by  direct  execution  for  part  or  all  of  the  programme  to  enable  response  to  force 
majeure.  The  harmonized  approach  to  cash  transfers  and  the  Enterprise  Risk   Management 
Policy  will be used  in a coordinated fashion with other  United  Nations agencies to manage 
financial  risks.  Cost  definitions  and  classifications  for  programme  and  development 
effectiveness  will  be  charged  to  the  concerned  projects.  To  mitigate  the  risks  related  to  the 
programme delivery, the country office will develop quarterly delivery  acceleration plans, the 
implementation  of  which  (includin g  national  execution  advance  liquidation)  will  be 
monitored on weekly basis.  
31.  The national governance mechanisms of  the RCPCA will be used to ensure that United 
Nations and UNDP support are implemented in line with nationally led priorit ies and ensure 
that  partners  participate  on mutual  accountability  through  the  RCPCA  mutual  commitment 
framework. These mechanisms include the Policy Board, which promotes high-level d ialogue 
on policymaking; and the Joint Steering Committee, which ensures strategic coordination at 
portfolio level and constitutes the framework for consultation between the Government and 
all  partners  for  implementation  of  the  RCPCA.  The  latter  is    co-chaired  by  the  Resident 
Coordinator  and  the  Government.  UNDP  is  posit ioned  as  lead  or  co-lead  for  sectoral  and 
programmatic coordination within the three pillars  of the RCPCA. 
32.  The  implementation  of  the  programme  will  take  place  in  an  uncertain  environment 
marked  by  political  and  security  risks.  Armed  groups  continue  to  operate  on  the  country's 
territory with the potential for the security situation to deteriorate, which could  hinder or even 
prevent  UNDP  accessing    target  populations.  UNCT  and  MINUSCA  will  monitor  and 
mitigate risk by ensurin g balance between upstream and downstream interventions by taking 
account  of  endogenous  causes  and  cross-border  conflict  dynamics.  The  programme  will  be 
adjusted with a focus on more accessible and secure  regions.  UNDP  will wo rk  in enhanced 
partnerships with other United Nations agencies, development partners and CSOs promoting 
conflict-sensitive  approaches  focused  on 
the  humanitarian-development-peace  nexus, 
allowin g  the  programme  to  change  course  without  losing  focus  on  delivering    long-term 
results.  
33.  Financial risks are crit ical, reflect ing various contexts and the “wait and see” position of 
the  country’s  traditional  international  partners  (European  Union,  World  Bank,  Internationa l 
Monetary  Fund,  Government  of  France  etc.).  To  mitigate  these  risks,  in   addition  to 
revitalizin g the existing partnerships (European Union, Governments of Japan, United States, 
etc.),  UNDP  intends  to  establish  new  partnerships  with  non-conventional  donors  such  as 
7 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
universities, the private sector and financial institutions including those outside of the country . 
In  the  event  of  resource  gaps,  UNDP  will  scale  down  activities  by  focusing  on  the 
geographical areas covered by the previous programme to maximize impacts while ensuring 
cost-effectiveness.  
34.  Electoral  processes  are  exposed  to  signif icant  risks  of  post -electoral  conflict.  This 
programme will start during   the extension of the current electoral cycle with local elect ions 
scheduled in 2023. These  elections could  induce sign ificant risk  or p resent an opportunity by 
creating  an  environment  conducive  for  local  development.  This  risk  will  be  mitigated  by 
promoting  intra -party  dialogue  and  advancing  the  agenda  for  political  sta bilization  and 
consolidation of peace.  
35.  UNDP  will  use  innovative  programming  instruments  for  the  delivery  of  quality  results 
such  as  the  engagement  facility  and  development  services,  in   addition  to  standard 
development projects, to provide rapid and flexible response mechanisms to support upstream 
policy  resu lts,  evaluation and assessments,  crisis  responses  and  testing  of  innovations  with 
scale-up potential and seizing  opportunities for collaboration with  the private sector. 
36.  The social and environmental risks associated with UNDP action, particularly in artisanal 
small-scale  minin g,  will  be  addressed  by  applying  the  corporate  social  and  environmental 
safeguards, accountability, early warning and grievance-redress mechanisms for communities. 
UNDP  will  put in place proper mitigation measures.  
37.  The steerin g committee governance mechanism will ensure proper implementation of the 
programme through regular review and recommendations according to the evolving context.  
IV. Monitoring and evaluation 
38.  The country office will prepare an integrated monitoring and evaluation plan, which will 
serve as a reference framework throughout the programme period. This five-year plan  will be 
broken  down  into annual  plans  to  guide  monitoring  and  evaluation at both progra mme and 
project levels. 
39.  A  coherent,  gender-sensit ive  monitoring  system  will  be  established  to  ensure  that 
disaggregated data  are collected and available in a timely manner. Period ic progress  reports 
will be p roduced at programme and project level to assess progress towards agreed outputs. 
Field  v isits  will  be  organized  to  validate  results,  collect  the  opin ions  of  beneficiaries  and 
stakeholders  and  propose  recommendations  to  improve  the  implementation  of  projects  and 
programme.  The  information  generated  will  be  capitalized  for  the  monitoring  of  strategic 
documents  such  as  the  UNDP  Strategic  Plan,  the  UNSDCF,  the  RC PCA  and  other 
international agendas.  
40.  For areas  where access can be restricted, data will be collected in partnership with third 
parties.  Mechanisms  will  be  established  to  ensure  the  credibility  of  collected  data.  Remote 
meetings for project and programme steering committees will  be considered. 
41.  For monitoring at the outcome level, national and international sources will be prio rit ized 
when available. In collaboration with other  United  Nations agencies,  UNDP  will strengthen 
national capacities to organize surveys, collect and analyse the data needed to fill gaps. 
42.  All new projects will be subject to a prior social and environmental  screening procedure 
and  the  identified  risks  will  be  monitored  and  mitigated  through  appropriate  actions. 
Innovation data will be collected in real time through the Accelerator Lab.  
43.  The theory of change, the results and resources framework and the evaluation plan will 
be  reviewed  and  updated  according  to  the  evolution  of  the  country  context,  the  results 
obtained and the lessons learned.  
8 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
44.  Progress towards  gender equality will be monitored  through the gender marker and the 
collection  of  sex-disaggregated  data.  UNDP  will  allocate  15  per  cent  of  programmatic 
resources  to projects whose main objective is gender equality. Similarly, 5 to 10  per cent of 
the programme budget will  be allocated for monitoring, evaluation and communication. 
45.  A knowledge management strategy will be available to ensure that target audiences are 
regularly  informed about programme  performance and  lessons  learned and   tangible  results 
will  be disseminated through innovative communication channels such as social networks.   
9 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
Annex. Results and resources framework for the Central African Republic (2023-2027) 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: National Recovery and Peacebuilding  Plan (RCPCA) Pillar  1: Restoring peace, security and social cohesion  Pillar 2: Renewing the 
social contract  between the State and the population 
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP# 1: By 2027, people in the Central  African Republic  live under the rule of law, have access to justice and security, and their 
human rights are promoted and protected. 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:   Structural transformation  accelerated,  particularly  green, inclusive and digital transitions 
DATA SOURCE AND 
FREQUENCY OF 
DATA COLLECTION, 
AND 
RESPONSIBILITIES 
UNSDCF OUTCOME 
INDICATOR(S), 
BASELINES, TARGET(S) 
MAJOR PARTNERS / 
PARTNERSHIPS 
FRAMEWORKS 
ESTIMATED 
COST BY 
OUTCOME ($) 
INDICATIVE COUNTRY PROGRAMME OUTPUTS  
1.1. % of the population 
who indicate  having 
confidence  in ordinary 
justice 
Baseline (2021): 47.35% 
Target (2027): 60% 
Source: Peace, justice and 
security polls 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s office 
Line ministries 
MINUSCA 
Government of the United 
States  
European Union 
CSOs 
Media network  
Regular:  
$11,120,000 
Output 1.1: Civic space and access to justice expanded for the most 
vulnerable  including prisoners and victims  of human rights 
violations, and rule of law, human rights strengthened to meet 
national  and international  standards. 
 
Other:  
$56,500,000 
 
Indicators: 
 
 
 
1.1.1 Number of trials organized  by the Special  Criminal Court 
Baseline (202): 1 Target (2027): 5 
Source: Reports of the Ministry in charge of justice 
Frequency: annual 
 
 
1.1.2. Number of victim  files processed by the Truth, Justice, 
Reparation  and Reconciliation  Commission   
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 40 
Source: Reports of Ministry in charge of justice 
Frequency: annual 
 
1.1.3 Number of people supported who have access to justice (SP 
indicator  2.2.3) 
Baseline (2020): 22,700 (64% women) Target (2027): 42,700 (70% 
women) 
Source: Reports of Ministry in charge of justice 
Frequency: annual 
 
1.1.4 Number of internal  security forces deployed to ensure the 
safety of the population  outside Bangui   
 
10 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
Baseline (2022): 1,668 (5% women) Target (2027): 2,500 (10% 
women) 
Source: Reports Ministry of Interior and Public Security and 
MINUSCA 
Frequency: annual 
Source: Peace, justice and 
security polls 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s office 
1.2. % of the population 
having confidence in the 
Defence and Security 
Forces, Armed Forces and 
police to ensure their safety 
Baseline (2020): 
Gendarmerie:  48% 
Police: 43%  
Target (2027): 
Gendarmerie:  55% 
Police: 50% 
Output 1.2: Democratic  processes, institutions,  and civil society 
strengthened for an inclusive and open public sphere with expanded 
public engagement  facilitated  using digital  solutions. 
National Elections 
Authority  
Constitutional  Court 
Media network 
Line ministries 
CSOs 
Government of the United 
States  
European Union 
UN-Women 
MINUSCA 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 
1.2.1 Number of new registered  voters (SP indicator  2.4.2) 
Baseline (2022): Female: 0; Male:0 
Target (2027): 840,000 Female: 420,000; Male: 420,000 
Source: National Elections  Authority 
Frequency: annual 
 
 
1.2.2 Number of people who participated  in elections:  (SP indicator 
2.4.3) 
Baseline (2020): 655,000 
Target (2025): 1,600,000 
Source: Constitutional  court 
Frequency: depending on the electoral  calendar  
Output 1.3: Effective  and accountable  governance systems 
enhanced to co-create  and equip all actors, including  the private 
sector, with solutions to prevent and mitigate  corruption risks and 
accelerate  the achievement  of SDGs 
Line ministries 
High Authority for Good 
Governance 
CSOs 
MINUSCA 
United Nations agencies 
 
 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 
1.3.1 Number of measures to strengthen accountability  (including 
social accountability),  prevent and mitigate  corruption risks, and 
integrate  anti-corruption  in the management  of public funds, service 
delivery and other sectors (SP 2.1.1): 
Baseline (2022): 
•  National level:  0 
•  Local level:  0 
•  Sectoral level:  0 
Target (2027): 
•  National level:  2 
•  Local level:  6 
11 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
•  Sectoral level:  3  
 
1.3.2 Number of multi-stakeholder  mechanisms, including  social 
innovation or digital  platforms between governments, communities 
and the private sector to strengthen public sector agility, 
collaboration,  the co-design, public and private financing  and 
delivery of solutions for sustainable development  at national and 
sectoral level  (SP 2.1.3): 
Baseline (2022): 
•  National level:  0 
•  Sectoral level:  0 
Target (2027): 
•  National level:  2 
•  Sectoral level:  3 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: RCPCA Pillar  2: Renewing the social contract  between the State and the population;  RCPCA Pillar 3: Promote economic  recovery and the 
revival of productive  sectors 
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP# 2: By 2027, people in Central  African Republic,  including women, youth, refugees, returnees, IDPs and all other vulnerable  groups, 
have equitable  and sustainable access to economic opportunities that promote the creation of decent jobs, entrepreneurship, innovation and digitalization 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:   Structural transformation  accelerated,  particularly  green, inclusive and digital transitions 
Source: Bank of Central 
African States 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s office 
Output 2.1: The 2030 Agenda, Paris Agreement and other 
intergovernmentally-agreed  frameworks integrated  into national  and 
local development  plans; measures to accelerate  progress put in 
place;  and budgets and progress assessed using data-driven  solutions 
(SP output 1.1)  
Line ministries 
European Union 
MINUSCA 
United Nations agencies 
Regular: 
$9,662,000 
2.1 Share of loans to the 
economy allocated  to SMEs 
Baseline (2022): 0.4% 
Target (2027): 5% 
 
Other: 
$51,000,000 
 
 
2.2 Poverty rate  
Baseline (2021): 71.2%  
Target (2027): 62%  
 
 
Indicators: 
 
2.1.1 To what extent the country's development  plans and budgets 
integrate  intergovernmentally-agreed  frameworks across the whole-
of-government (SP indicator 1.1.1)   
Baseline (2022):  
 
· 2030 Agenda for Sustainable  Development:  2 (Integration in 
progress) 
· Beijing Declaration  and Platform for Action: 2 (Integration in 
progress) 
Target (2027):  
· 2030 Agenda for Sustainable  Development:  4 (Integrated) 
· Beijing Declaration  and Platform for Action: 4 (Integrated) 
Source: Reports line ministries 
12 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
Frequency: annual 
 
2.1.2 To what extent the country has studies, innovation results and 
relevant  data and data management  systems in place to guide the 
formulation  and monitor the implementation  of national 
development  policies and programmes 
Baseline (2021): 2 (Work in progress) 
Target (2027): 4 (Work completed) 
Source: Reports line ministries 
Frequency: annual 
 
2.1.3 To what extent the country has an effective  national 
development  financing framework (INFF) 
Baseline (2021): 1 (Work started) 
Target (2027): 3 (Work almost complete) 
Source: Reports line ministries 
Frequency: annual 
Output 2.2: Access to basic services and financial  and non-financial 
assets and services improved to support productive  capacities  for 
sustainable livelihoods  and jobs (SP 1.3) 
Line ministries 
European Union 
MINUSCA 
OCHA 
UNHCR 
 
 
 
 
Indicators:  
 
 
2.2.1 Number of people, including  women, youth, IDPs, ethnic 
minorities,  accessing basic services 
Baseline (2021): 32,0000 (47% women) 
Target (2027): 57,000 (50% women) 
Source: Reports of Key Ministries 
Frequency: annual 
 
2.2.2 Number of people, including  women, youth, IDPs, ethnic 
minorities,  accessing financial  services 
Baseline (2021): 6,200 (49% women) 
Target (2027): 10,200 (50% women) 
Source: Reports of Key Ministries 
Frequency: annual 
 
2.2.3 Number of Agriculture  and mineral  value chains for trade 
developed 
Baseline (2021): 0  
Target (2027): 3 
Source: Reports of key ministries 
13 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
Frequency: annual 
 
2.2.4 Number of people, including  women, youth, IDPs, ethnic 
minorities  benefiting from jobs and improved livelihoods in crisis 
or post-crisis settings (SP indicator  3.3.1) 
Baseline (2022): 22,000 
Target (2027): 42000 (40% women) 
Source: Reports of Key Ministries 
Frequency: annual 
Output 2.3: Equitable,  resilient  and sustainable  systems for health 
and pandemic  preparedness strengthened to address communicable 
and non-communicable  diseases (SP1.4). 
Line ministries 
MINUSCA 
United Nations agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
2.3.1 Number of health  structures equipped with cold chains 
powered by solar energy 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 20 
Source: Reports Ministry in charge of health 
Frequency: annual 
Output 2.4: Social protection  systems strengthened across public 
administrations,  private and informal sectors and non-governmental 
institutions 
Line ministries 
United Nations agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
2.4.1 Existence  of an inclusive and gender-sensitive national  social 
protection  policy document 
Baseline (2022): No Target (2027): Yes 
Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of labour and social 
protection 
Frequency: annual 
 
2.4.2 Number of participants  covered by social protection  services 
(SP indicator  1.2.2.1)  
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 1500 (40% women) 
Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of labour and social 
protection 
Frequency: annual 
 
 
14 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: RCPCA Pillar  1: Restoring peace, security and social cohesion  National  Recovery and Peacebuilding  Plan 
UNSDCF OUTCOME INVOLVING UNDP#  3: By 2027, people in Central  African Republic  live in an environment where peacebuilding, national reconciliation  and 
governance mechanisms are inclusive, accountable and effective 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:   Resilience  built to respond to systemic uncertainty  and risk 
1.1. % of the population who 
perceive  a decrease in 
sociocultural  tensions in the 
last 12 months 
Baseline (2020):88% 
Target (2027): 95%  
Source: Peace, justice and 
security polls 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s Office 
Output 3.1: Decentralization,  local development  and governance 
are effective,  risk-informed to enable socio-economic  development, 
inclusive delivery  of basic services, community  security, disaster 
and conflict  prevention.  
Line ministries 
European Union 
MINUSCA 
OCHA 
UNHCR 
FAO 
WFP 
Regular: 
$8,875,000 
 
Other: 
$39,400,000 
 
Indicators: 
 
 
 
 
3.1.1 Number of subnational  administrations  with a conflict  and 
gender-sensitive  local development  plan 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 15 
Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of territorial  administration 
Frequency: annual 
 
3.1.2 Number of subnational  administrations  that implement  their 
development  plan 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 10 
Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of territorial 
administration  Frequency: annual 
 
3.1.3 Number of key actors implementing  actions to prevent and 
respond to violent  extremism 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 30 
Source: Reports on the National Strategy for Prevention of 
Radicalization  and Extreme Violence   
Frequency: annual 
 
3.1.4 Number of national  and subnational  administration  with multi-
hazards contingency plans and/or disaster risk prevention plans 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): national:4  (humanitarian  action, 
agriculture,  health, housing); subnational :10 
Source: Reports from Ministry in charge of territorial 
administration 
Frequency: annual 
1.1.2 % of the population 
who indicate  that the Central 
Source: Peace, justice and 
security polls 
Output 3.2. Advancing gender equality, women’s leadership  and 
participation,  including in crisis contexts, through the 
Line ministries 
CSOs 
 
15 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
African Republic lives in 
peace 
Baseline (2020):16% 
Target (2027):30% 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s Office 
implementation  of affirmative  measures, strengthening  institutions 
and civil  society, and addressing structural  barriers.  
United Nations agencies 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 
 
 
3.2.1 Number of partnerships with institutions  and civil society to 
advance women’s leadership  and participation  and gender equality 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 10 
Source: Ministry in charge of gender 
Frequency: annual 
 Office 
 
 
3.2.2 Number of women in decision-making  bodies within 
institutions of the republic 
Baseline (2022): 194 
Target (2027): 230 
Source: Ministry in charge of gender 
Frequency: annual 
NATIONAL PRIORITY OR GOAL: RCPCA Pillar  3: Promote economic  recovery and the revival of productive  sectors 
UNSDCFCPD OUTCOME 4: By 2027, the resilience  of the State and populations is strengthened  through the sustainable governance  of natural resources and the environment 
RELATED STRATEGIC PLAN OUTCOME:   Structural transformation  accelerated,  particularly  green, inclusive and digital transitions 
Source: FAO 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s Office 
Output 4.1: Natural resources protected and managed equitably  and 
in a participatory  and inclusive  manner to enhance  adaptation, 
climate-informed  sustainable  productivity, livelihoods  and reduce 
sources of conflict 
Line ministries 
CSOs 
United Nations agencies 
Regular:  
$5,937,000 
4.1. Area of deforested and 
degraded land that has been 
developed / restored 
(UNSDCF) 
Baseline (2018): 591,000 ha 
Target (2027): 750,000 ha 
 
Other:  
$26,100,000 
 
 
Indicators: 
 
 
4.1.1 Number of communities  with strengthened capacities  to 
manage protected  area 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 3 
Source: Reports Ministry in charge of the environment 
Frequency: annual 
4.2 Area of agricultural  land 
developed and/or developed 
(UNSDCF) 
Baseline (2020): 375,000 ha 
Target (2027): 750,000 ha 
 
 
4.1.2 Number of communities  with strengthened capacities  to 
promote eco-tourism 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 3 
Source: Reports Ministry in charge of the environment 
Frequency: annual 
 
16 
 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
4.1.3 Protected areas created  or under improved management 
practices  (hectares) (SP indicator 4.1.2) 
Baseline (2022): 0 Target (2027): 1500 hectares 
Source: Reports Ministry of environment 
Frequency: annual 
Source: FAO 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s Office 
Output 4.2: Public and private  climate 
finance mobilized  supporting enterprise and job creation through 
sustainable use of water, forests and soils, promoting biodiversity, 
climate  solutions and the implementation  of the Central  African 
Republic NDC within long-term  sustainable risk-informed 
development  pathways. 
Line ministries 
CSOs 
United Nations agencies 
 
 
 
 
Indicators:  
 
4.2.1 Number of people directly  benefiting  from mechanisms for 
biodiversity, water, forest, and climate  solutions funded by public 
resources (SP 4.2.1): 
Baselines (2022): 0 
Targets (2027): 1,000 
Source: Reports in charge of the environment 
Frequency: annual 
4.3 Proportion of prefectures 
that have adopted and 
implemented  disaster risk 
reduction strategies  in their 
local development  plan 
Baseline (2022): 0% 
Target (2027): 50% 
Source: Ministry in 
charge of territorial 
administration 
Frequency: annual 
Responsibility: Resident 
Coordinator’s Office 
Output 4.3: Transition to renewable energy accelerated 
capitalizing  on technological  gains, clean energy innovations and 
new financing mechanisms  to support green recovery (SP 5.2) 
Line ministries 
CSOs 
United Nations agencies 
 
 
Indicators:  
 
4.3.1 Number of functional  micro hydroelectric  or solar power 
station installed   
Baseline (2022): Small Hydroelectric:  0 Small Solar Power: 0 
Target (2027): Small Hydroelectric:  4 Small Solar Power: 5 
Source: Reports of the Ministry in charge of energy   
Frequency: annual 
 
 
4.3.2 Increase (in megawatt)  in installed  renewable energy capacity 
per technology  (SP indicator  5.2.1)   
Baseline (2022): Hydroelectric:  0 Solar Power:0 
Target (2027): Hydroelectric:  4 MW Solar Power: 5 MW 
Source: Reports of the Ministry in charge of energy   
Frequency: annual 
 
17 
DP/DCP/CAF/5 
 
 
4.3.3 Number of independent  green and vertical  funds 
Baseline (2022): 0 
Target (2027): 1 
Source: Reports of the Ministry in charge of the environment 
Frequency: annual 
 
 
18 
